TITLE: Cyclic GMP–AMP synthase deficiency predisposes the liver to alcohol-induced cell death and ER stress
PMID: 41730234
PMC: 
------------------------------------------------------------

# ABSTRACT
Background: Cyclic GMP–AMP synthase (cGAS) catalyzes the production of cGAMP, which activates the STING–IRF3 signaling pathway. Previous investigations indicated a role for STING–IRF3 in early alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD). In this study, we examined the role of cGAS in liver damage and inflammation in early ALD. Methods: Wild-type (WT) or cGAS knockout (cGAS-KO) mice received a single dose of alcohol (5 g/kg), and in WT mice with or without a cGAS inhibitor, RU.521 (5 mg/kg) or 2′–3′ cGAMP or control. Liver and serum were evaluated after 9 hours of alcohol administration. Results: Alcohol gavage in cGAS knockout (cGAS-KO) mice led to increased liver damage compared with WT mice. Inhibition of cGAS with the small molecule, RU.521, also resulted in increased serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferases. cGAS deficiency or inhibition made the liver susceptible to alcohol-induced apoptosis. Alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice and WT mice treated with the cGAS inhibitor showed enhanced unfolded protein response in the liver. This was associated with elevated levels of the proinflammatory cytokines, macrophage migration inhibitory factor, CD68 + cells, Ly6G + cells, and chemokines like lipocalin-2 and neutrophil elastase. Primary hepatocytes isolated from cGAS-KO mice displayed increased levels of cleaved caspase-3, XBP1s, and CHOP after alcohol administration as compared with WT control hepatocytes. Interestingly, restoration of cGAMP levels after cGAS inhibition improved liver damage and autophagic flux. Conclusions: Our findings highlight that cGAS deficiency or cGAS inhibition predisposes the liver to increased damage, apoptosis, and unfolded protein response in early ALD. An increase in the proinflammatory cytokine MIF and chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment might contribute to the increased liver damage. In summary, our findings indicate a protective role for cGAS activation in early ALD.

# BODY
## INTRODUCTION
Alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) is a multifactorial disease, which is characterized by steatosis, inflammation, fibrosis, and cirrhosis. 1 2 3 ALD pathogenesis is manifested by increased hepatocyte damage, cell death, followed by neutrophil and other immune cell infiltration, and activation. 1 2 3 In ALD, several signaling pathways required for repair and restoration of homeostasis such as unfolded protein response (UPR) and autophagy are dysregulated. 4 5 6 The cyclic GMP–AMP synthase (cGAS) is a part of the innate immune system and recognizes, self or foreign, double-stranded (ds) DNA. 7 8 9 Binding of cGAS to dsDNA catalyzes the production of 2′-3′ cyclic GMP–AMP (cGAMP), which activates endoplasmic reticulum-resident protein stimulator of interferon (IFN) (STING) and a transcription factor, interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). 7 8 9 Activation of cGAS–STING–IRF3 signaling cascade leads to enhanced expression of type I IFNs and inflammatory cytokines. 7 8 9 In early ALD, STING–IRF3 pathway activation causes hepatocyte apoptosis. 10 cGAS is implicated in driving several inflammatory diseases and autoimmune conditions and is shown to regulate apoptosis, autophagy, angiogenesis, and stemness. 7 8 9 11 Several evidence indicate the involvement of cGAS in liver diseases. In a mouse model of liver ischemia and reperfusion injury, cGAS plays a protective role by suppressing autophagy and cell death. 12 Similarly, in MASH pathogenesis, cGAS maintains intestinal homeostasis, and its deficiency causes an increase in serum endotoxin and liver damage. 13 In addition, administration of cGAMP was shown to improve insulin resistance and inflammation in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD). 14 However, in the acute-on-chronic mouse model of ALD (the NIAAA model) and sepsis-associated acute liver injury (ALI), cGAS-KO mice had reduced liver injury and damage, suggesting that cGAS could also contribute to liver injury in these models. 15 16 Given this divergence, the precise role of cGAS in early ALD is not known. In this study, we aimed to determine the role of cGAS in early ALD. We found that cGAS is protective from alcohol-induced liver damage and injury. Deletion of cGAS or inhibition of cGAS by a small molecule inhibitor, RU.521, predisposes the liver to alcohol-induced cell death and dysregulated autophagy. Furthermore, we found an increase in CD68 + cells, chemokines recruiting neutrophils, and the cytokine MIF. Interestingly, exogenous cGAMP ameliorated liver injury and autophagy. Collectively, our findings reveal a novel protective role for cGAS in early ALD.


## METHODS
Animal care and treatments Eight-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory and housed in Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC) in compliance with institutional guidelines. The mice were kept under a controlled atmosphere in 12-hour light and dark cycles. All the additional procedures were approved by the UMASS and BIDMC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC, protocol #30-2022). cGAS-KO mice were provided by Kate Fitzgerald (UMass Chan Medical School). cGAS-KO mice were backcrossed with C57BL/6J mice for 3 generations. 13 Wild-type (WT) and cGAS-KO mice were fed on a chow diet and were randomly divided into 2 groups. The first group of WT and cGAS-KO mice received a single water gavage. The other group of WT and cGAS-KO mice received a single 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage. The mice were sacrificed 9 hours after the binge, and blood and liver samples were collected, processed immediately, and stored at −80 °C for further analyses. Two independent feedings of WT and cGAS-KO mice were performed, and samples from both feedings were used for ALT, AST, and blood alcohol assessment. However, for the western blot, both feeding samples were used, depending on sample availabiltiy. For the cGAS inhibitor intervention, 8-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were randomly divided into 3 groups and were fed on a standard laboratory chow diet. One group of chow-fed mice received water gavage. The second and third groups received a single 5 g/kg alcohol gavage. The third group of mice was administered cGAS inhibitor, RU.521 (5 mg/kg, Selleck Chemicals USA #S6841) via i.p., followed by 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage after 1 hour. The mice were sacrificed 9 hours after the binge, and blood and liver samples were collected, processed immediately, and stored at −80 °C for further analyses. For the 2′–3′ cGAMP inhibitor intervention, 8-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were randomly divided into 4 groups and were fed on a standard laboratory chow diet. The first group received water gavage and vehicle control. The second group of mice received 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage, and after 1 hour of alcohol administration, 2′–3′ cGAMP control (500 μg/kg, InvivoGen, USA tlrl-nagpap). In the third group of mice, cGAS inhibitor RU.521 (5 mg/kg, Selleck Chemicals USA #S6841) was administered via i.p., followed by 1 hour later, 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage was administered. The fourth group of mice was administered with RU.521 to inhibit the cGAS, followed by 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage after 1 hour of administering RU.521. After 1 hour of alcohol gavage, the third and fourth group of mice was administered with 2′–3′ cGAMP control and 2′3′-cGAMP, respectively (500 μg/kg, InvivoGen, USA #tlrl-nacga23). The mice were sacrificed 9 hours after the binge, and blood and liver samples were collected, processed immediately, and stored at −80 °C for further analyses. All the animal experiments were reported using the ARRIVE reporting guidelines. 17 Additional methods Please see the Supplemental material and method section, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 , for additional materials and methodology used in this study. Statistical analysis Statistical significance was determined using one-way ANOVA or an unpaired t test. Each experiment was repeated at least 3 times to determine the biological significance. Data are shown as mean ± SEM and were considered statistically significant at p ≤0.05. GraphPad Prism software (version 9; GraphPad Software Inc.) was used for analysis. Data availability statement All the data relevant to the study are included in the article or uploaded as supplementary information. Study approval All animal procedures were approved by the UMASS and BIDMC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC, protocol #019–2019, #30–2022).


## Animal care and treatments
Eight-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory and housed in Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center (BIDMC) in compliance with institutional guidelines. The mice were kept under a controlled atmosphere in 12-hour light and dark cycles. All the additional procedures were approved by the UMASS and BIDMC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC, protocol #30-2022). cGAS-KO mice were provided by Kate Fitzgerald (UMass Chan Medical School). cGAS-KO mice were backcrossed with C57BL/6J mice for 3 generations. 13 Wild-type (WT) and cGAS-KO mice were fed on a chow diet and were randomly divided into 2 groups. The first group of WT and cGAS-KO mice received a single water gavage. The other group of WT and cGAS-KO mice received a single 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage. The mice were sacrificed 9 hours after the binge, and blood and liver samples were collected, processed immediately, and stored at −80 °C for further analyses. Two independent feedings of WT and cGAS-KO mice were performed, and samples from both feedings were used for ALT, AST, and blood alcohol assessment. However, for the western blot, both feeding samples were used, depending on sample availabiltiy. For the cGAS inhibitor intervention, 8-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were randomly divided into 3 groups and were fed on a standard laboratory chow diet. One group of chow-fed mice received water gavage. The second and third groups received a single 5 g/kg alcohol gavage. The third group of mice was administered cGAS inhibitor, RU.521 (5 mg/kg, Selleck Chemicals USA #S6841) via i.p., followed by 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage after 1 hour. The mice were sacrificed 9 hours after the binge, and blood and liver samples were collected, processed immediately, and stored at −80 °C for further analyses. For the 2′–3′ cGAMP inhibitor intervention, 8-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were randomly divided into 4 groups and were fed on a standard laboratory chow diet. The first group received water gavage and vehicle control. The second group of mice received 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage, and after 1 hour of alcohol administration, 2′–3′ cGAMP control (500 μg/kg, InvivoGen, USA tlrl-nagpap). In the third group of mice, cGAS inhibitor RU.521 (5 mg/kg, Selleck Chemicals USA #S6841) was administered via i.p., followed by 1 hour later, 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage was administered. The fourth group of mice was administered with RU.521 to inhibit the cGAS, followed by 5 g/kg of alcohol gavage after 1 hour of administering RU.521. After 1 hour of alcohol gavage, the third and fourth group of mice was administered with 2′–3′ cGAMP control and 2′3′-cGAMP, respectively (500 μg/kg, InvivoGen, USA #tlrl-nacga23). The mice were sacrificed 9 hours after the binge, and blood and liver samples were collected, processed immediately, and stored at −80 °C for further analyses. All the animal experiments were reported using the ARRIVE reporting guidelines. 17


## Additional methods
Please see the Supplemental material and method section, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 , for additional materials and methodology used in this study.


## Statistical analysis
Statistical significance was determined using one-way ANOVA or an unpaired t test. Each experiment was repeated at least 3 times to determine the biological significance. Data are shown as mean ± SEM and were considered statistically significant at p ≤0.05. GraphPad Prism software (version 9; GraphPad Software Inc.) was used for analysis.


## Data availability statement
All the data relevant to the study are included in the article or uploaded as supplementary information.


## Study approval
All animal procedures were approved by the UMASS and BIDMC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC, protocol #019–2019, #30–2022).


## RESULTS
cGAS deficiency or cGAS inhibition increases liver damage To investigate the effect of cGAS deficiency in early ALD, we administered a single acute alcohol gavage to global cGAS knockout mice (referred to as cGAS-KO), as shown in Figure 1 A. A previous study using an acute-on-chronic ALD model (the NIAAA model) indicated that cGAS-KO mice were protected against liver damage. 16 Surprisingly, our findings revealed significantly higher ALT levels in the cGAS-KO mice following alcohol gavage compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figure 1 B). Higher AST levels were observed in WT alcohol-fed mice as compared with controls (Figure 1 C). Notably, cGAS-KO mice, irrespective of alcohol administration, exhibited increased AST levels as compared with controls (Figure 1 C). Further, histological assessments of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained liver sections did not show any significant differences in WT and cGAS-KO after the alcohol binge (Figure 1 D). To further understand if cGAS-KO has impaired alcohol metabolism, which can contribute to liver injury, we next checked the serum blood alcohol levels (Figure 1 E). We did not observe any significant difference in blood alcohol levels between WT alcohol-fed mice and cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice (Figure 1 E). These results suggest that cGAS deletion does not impair alcohol metabolism (Figure 1 E). FIGURE 1 Absence or depletion of cGAS increases liver damage. (A) Feeding schematics for alcohol administration in WT and cGAS-KO mice. A 5 g/kg alcohol intra-gastric gavage was administered to WT and cGAS-KO mice. (B, C) ALT and AST levels were measured from serum. (D) Formalin-fixed liver sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and representative images are shown. (E) Blood alcohol level was measured from serum. (F) Feeding schematics for administration of alcohol and cGAS inhibitor in C57BL/6J WT mice. (G, H) ALT and AST levels were measured from serum. (I) Formalin-fixed liver sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and representative images are shown. created with BioRender.com. Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, *** p ≤0.0005, and **** p <0.0001. Abbreviations: cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; WT, wild type. To further validate our observation of increased liver damage in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice, we treated WT mice with a small molecule inhibitor of cGAS, RU.521, which was previously shown to attenuate interferon expression. 18 RU.521 was administered 1 hour before the intra-gastric gavage of acute alcohol, with a control group receiving only the alcohol gavage, as depicted in Figure 1 C. The serum ALT and AST levels were significantly elevated in the group treated with the cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol compared with the alcohol-only group and the control mice (Figures 1 D, E). However, we did not observe any changes in the H&E-stained liver sections of cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol compared with the alcohol-only group and the control mice (Figure 1 I). An increase in transaminases indicates that cGAS deficiency or inhibition exacerbates alcohol-induced liver damage in the early stages of ALD. These results suggest that cGAS may play a distinct role in the acute binge model compared with the NIAAA model of ALD, potentially serving a protective role in the early stages of ALD. cGAS deficiency and cGAS inhibition increase alcohol-induced cell death in the liver in mice Given our observation that alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice had significantly higher ALT as compared with alcohol-fed WT mice, we evaluated apoptosis markers in WT and cGAS-KO mice after alcohol or water gavage. During apoptosis, BAX promotes the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria, while caspase-3 cleaves poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1). As a result, both BAX and cleaved PARP serve as hallmarks of apoptosis. 19 We found a significant increase in BAX levels in the livers of cGAS-KO mice in the presence of alcohol as compared with WT alcohol mice (Figures 2 A, B and Supplemental Figure S1, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ). Similarly, we observed a significant increase in cleaved PARP levels in the livers of alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice (Figures 2 C, D). FIGURE 2 cGAS-KO and cGAS inhibitor–administered mice's liver is predisposed to alcohol-induced cell death. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for BAX (A) and cleaved PARP (C). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for BAX (B) and Clv-PARP (D). Hepatocyte lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered WT and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. The immunoblot was probed with an anti–cleaved caspase-3 antibody, and densitometric analysis is shown as a bar diagram (E, F). Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice (n=3–6) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for cleaved caspase-3 (E) and cleaved PARP (G). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for cleaved caspase-3 (F) and cleaved PARP (H). TUNEL assay was performed on liver sections of WT and cGAS-KO mice (K, L) and cGAS inhibitor mice using WT as a control (M, N). Quantification of TUNEL + cells in (L) and (N). Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05 and ** p ≤0.005. Abbreviations: BAX, Bcl-2–associated protein X; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; WT, wild type. Activation of the STING–IRF3 signaling pathway downstream of cGAS induces hepatocyte apoptosis in early stages of ALD. 10 Therefore, we next checked the level of cleaved caspase-3 in hepatocytes isolated from WT and cGAS-KO mice after alcohol or water gavage. We found a significant increase in cleaved caspase-3 levels in the primary hepatocytes of cGAS-KO mice after alcohol gavage compared with WT alcohol mice (Figures 2 E, F). Given our observation that cGAS deficiency predisposed the liver to increased alcohol-induced cell death, we next evaluated the role of the cGAS inhibitor in this process. We found that WT mice administered with alcohol and RU.521 showed a dramatic increase in the level of cleaved caspase-3 as compared with alcohol-fed mice (Figures 2 G, H). Similarly, the level of cleaved PARP was also elevated in the presence of the cGAS inhibitor in alcohol-fed mice compared with those fed alcohol alone (Figures 2 I, J). These results corroborate our findings from cGAS-KO, indicating that cGAS inhibition predisposes the liver to alcohol-induced apoptosis. We found a significant increase in TUNEL + cells in WT EtOH and cGAS-KO EtOH as compared with WT-water (Figures 2 K, L). Similarly, we observed an increasing trend in TUNEL + cells in WT mice administered with alcohol and cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol alone and water alone, suggesting increased apoptosis after alcohol administration in WT and cGAS-KO mice. Previous studies have implicated the role of cGAS in necroptosis; 20 21 22 therefore, we next assessed the markers of necroptosis in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor (Supplemental Figure S2, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ) by western blot. We observed no significant changes in the levels of necroptosis marker RIPK1 (Supplemental Figures S2A, B, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ), RIPK3 (Supplemental Figures S2D, E, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ), and MLKL (Supplemental Figures S2A–C, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ) in alcohol-fed mice administered with cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol-fed mice alone. These results suggest that the deficiency of cGAS and cGAS inhibition makes the liver more susceptible to alcohol-induced apoptosis but not necroptosis. Acute alcohol exposure increases the chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment in cGAS deficiency and inhibition Neutrophil infiltration is one of the hallmarks of ALD pathogenesis. 1 2 Earlier studies have shown hepatocyte damage leads to increased production of chemokines, which in turn recruit neutrophils and cause neutrophilia in ALD. 2 23 24 Based on this understanding, we hypothesized that increased cell death resulting from cGAS deficiency or inhibition might elevate chemokine production, prompting neutrophil recruitment. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found a dramatic increase in the level of lipocalin-2 (LCN2) and neutrophil elastase (NE) in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 3 A, B). FIGURE 3 cGAS deficiency and inhibition increase the chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment. (A–C) Whole-cell liver lysates from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) were used to detect LCN2 (A), NE (B), and CXCL1 (C) by ELISA. (D) Paraffin-embedded liver sections of control or EtOH mice, WT, and cGAS-KO mice were stained for Ly6G, and representative images are shown. (E–G) Whole-cell liver lysates from control, EtOH, and EtOH plus RU.521 were used to detect LCN2 (D), NE (E), and CXCL1 (F) by ELISA. (G) Paraffin-embedded liver sections from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice were stained for Ly6G, and representative images are shown. Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, *** p ≤0.0005, and **** p <0.0001. Abbreviations: cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; CXCL1, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1; LCN2, lipocalin-2; NE, neutrophil elastase; WT, wild type. Notably, the levels of LCN2 and NE in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice were significantly higher than those in control cGAS-KO mice, suggesting that alcohol induces a greater increase of these chemokines in cGAS-KO mice (Figures 3 A, B). However, CXCL1 levels were unaltered in cGAS-KO mice as compared with alcohol-fed WT mice (Figure 3 C). In addition, we observed a significant increase in the Ly6G + cells, as assessed by immunohistochemistry staining of liver sections in cGAS-KO after alcohol treatment, as compared with WT control, but no significant difference between WT and cGAS-KO alcohol mice (Figure 3 D). Consistent with these findings, we found a significant increase in the LCN2 levels in alcohol-fed WT mice administered with cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol-fed mice alone (Figure 3 E). NE was significantly increased in the WT alcohol-fed mice, but no additional increase was seen in the presence of cGAS inhibitor (Figure 3 F). Moreover, CXCL1 levels remain unaltered in alcohol-fed mice regardless of the presence or absence of cGAS inhibitors, compared with control mice (Figure 3 G). Similarly, we observed a significant increase in the Ly6G + cells in WT mice administered with cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol as compared with alcohol alone and water alone mice (Figure 3 H). These results suggest an increase in the chemokine involved in neutrophil recruitment with cGAS deficiency and inhibition in early ALD, which escalates neutrophil recruitment during the later stages of ALD, thereby promoting its pathogenesis. Macrophage inhibitory factor is elevated in cGAS-deficient mice and in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor ALD is characterized by hepatocyte death and increased inflammation. 1 2 Therefore, we analyzed inflammatory markers in relation to cGAS deficiency and inhibition. Hepatocyte death causes the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and macrophage inhibitory protein (MIF). 1 2 25 26 Our findings indicated that hepatic levels of IL-1β and MCP-1 were not significantly altered following single alcohol gavage in either WT or cGAS-KO mice (Figures 4 A, B). However, MIF levels in the liver were significantly increased in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figure 4 C). Interestingly, MIF levels were elevated in cGAS-KO mice even without alcohol administration (Figure 4 C). Acute alcohol gavage was previously shown to decrease F4/80 positive cells in liver. 27 Irrespective of the genotype, we observed a significant reduction in the mRNA level of F4/80 in WT and cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT-water and cGAS-KO water, respectively (Figure 4 D). We next evaluated hepatic macrophages by CD68 immunohistochemistry (Figure 4 E). Quantification of CD68-stained cells displayed a significant increase in WT and cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with respective controls (Figure 4 F). FIGURE 4 Inflammatory markers in cGAS-deficient mice and in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor. (A–C) Whole-cell liver lysates from control or EtOH-administered, WT and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) were used to detect IL-1β (A), MCP-1 (B), and MIF (C) by ELISA. (E) Paraffin-embedded liver sections of control or EtOH mice, WT, and cGAS-KO mice were stained for CD68, and representative images are shown. (F) CD68 + cells were quantified using ImageJ software and presented as a bar graph. (G–I) Whole-cell liver lysates from control, EtOH, and EtOH plus RU.521 were used to detect IL-1β (G), MCP-1 (H), and MIF (I) by ELISA. (J) Paraffin-embedded liver sections from control, EtOH, and EtOH plus RU.521 mice were stained for CD68, and representative images are shown. (K) CD68 + cells were quantified using ImageJ software and presented as a bar graph. Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05, ** p <0.005, and **** p <0.0001. Abbreviations: cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; IL-1β, interleukin 1 beta; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; MIF, migration inhibitory factor; WT, wild type. Next, we assessed the level of inflammatory markers in the alcohol-fed mice in the presence and absence of the cGAS inhibitor. We found that there was no change in the levels of IL-1β in alcohol-fed mice in the absence or presence of cGAS inhibitor (Figure 4 G). In contrast, MCP-1 levels were significantly higher in the alcohol-fed mice administered with the cGAS inhibitor compared with those without the inhibitor (Figure 4 H). In addition, MIF showed a similar pattern as observed in the cGAS-KO mice, showing a dramatic increase in the alcohol-fed mice in the presence of cGAS inhibitor (Figure 4 I). CD68 + cells, as assessed by immunohistochemistry, were significantly increased in the alcohol-fed WT mice administered with cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol-fed mice alone and water alone (Figures 4 J, K). These results suggest that cGAS depletion or deficiency leads to an increased production of the cytokine MIF and infiltration of CD68 + cells. UPR is increased in the liver of cGAS-deficient mice It has been reported that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and UPR cause hepatocyte inflammation and cell death, which in turn contribute to the pathogenesis of ALD. 4 5 25 An earlier study showed that MIF is upstream and regulates UPR pathway as MIF-deficient mice have reduced activation of UPR pathway and decreased liver damage, induced by alcohol. 26 28 29 Our observation that MIF levels are elevated in cGAS-KO mice prompted us to evaluate the levels of various components of the UPR pathways. The UPR pathway comprises 3 signaling pathways: the type I transmembrane protein inositol-requiring enzyme 1α (IRE1α), protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6). 30 31 Activation of IRE1α causes splicing of X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), which translocates to the nucleus and regulates the transcription of UPR target genes. 30 31 Activation of ATF6 increases the transcription of GRP94 and activates C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP). Similarly, activation of PERK causes phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2α (eIF2α) and the activation of CHOP. 30 31 XBP1s was slightly increased in WT alcohol-fed mice, which further increased significantly in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice (Figures 5 A, B). Control WT and cGAS-KO mice exhibited similar levels of XBP1, suggesting that the increase in XBP1 is due to alcohol-induced activation of the UPR pathway in cGAS-KO mice. ATF6 levels were increased in cGAS-KO mice as compared with control WT mice; however, there was no further increase in the presence of alcohol (Figures 5 C, D). Similarly, GRP94 levels showed increasing levels in cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT mice, but no further significant change was observed because of alcohol administration (Figures 6 F, G). Next, we assessed the activation of the PERK pathway by analyzing the level of p-eIF2α and CHOP in WT and cGAS-KO mice. p-eIF2α level remains unaffected by alcohol administration in both WT and cGAS-KO mice (Figures 5 C, E). While CHOP levels showed an increasing trend in the alcohol-fed WT mice, they were significantly increased in control cGAS-KO mice compared with control WT mice (Figures 5 H, I). FIGURE 5 cGAS deficiency increases unfolded protein response in mice. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for XBP1s (A), ATF6, p-eif2α, T-eif2α (C), Grp94 (F), and CHOP (H). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for XBP1s (B), ATF6 (D), p-eif2α and T-eif2α (E), Grp94 (G), and CHOP (I). Whole-cell hepatocyte lysates were extracted from control or EtOH mice, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4), and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for XBP1s (J) and CHOP (J). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for XBP1s (K) and CHOP (L). * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, and *** p ≤0.0005. Abbreviations: ATF6, activating transcription factor 6; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; CHOP, C/EBP-homologous protein; XBP1, X-box binding protein-1; WT, wild type. FIGURE 6 Unfolded protein response is increased in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice (n=3–6) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for XBP1s (A), ATF6, p-eif2α, and T-eif2α (C), Grp94 (F), and CHOP (H). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for XBP1s (B), ATF6 (D), p-eif2α and T-eif2α (E), Grp94 (G), and CHOP (I). * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005. Abbreviations: ATF6, activating transcription factor 6; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; CHOP, C/EBP-homologous protein; XBP1, X-box binding protein-1; WT, wild type. Persistent UPR pathway activation in ALD is associated with inflammation and hepatocyte apoptosis; 4 32 therefore, we checked the levels of XBP1s and CHOP in hepatocytes isolated from WT and cGAS-KO mice (Figures 5 J–L). We observed a significant increase in the level of XBP1s in WT EtOH-fed mice as compared with water, which was further significantly increased in the cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 5 J, K). Similarly, the levels of CHOP were significantly increased in the cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with cGAS-KO water-fed mice (Figures 5 J–L). These results suggest an increase in UPR response in hepatocytes and cGAS-KO mice, which might contribute to increased cell death in the presence of alcohol. cGAS inhibition increases unfolded protein response in mice To further understand the UPR pathway response to a significant increase in MIF in the mice administered with cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol, we examined the levels of different molecules of the UPR pathways. We found the significantly increased level of XBP1s in WT alcohol-fed mice, but this level did not further increase with the administration of the cGAS inhibitor (Figures 6 A, B). ATF6 levels were substantially increased in the presence of cGAS inhibitors as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice alone (Figures 6 C, D). Downstream of ATF6, we found a similar pattern in the expression of Grp94, which was significantly increased in the presence of cGAS inhibitor as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 6 F, G). However, levels of p-eIF2α, which are downstream of PERK activation, were not altered by either alcohol or cGAS inhibitor when compared with control gavage mice (Figures 6 C, E). CHOP levels were increased in mice fed with cGAS inhibitor as compared with control and alcohol alone mice (Figures 6 H, I). These results corroborate the findings from cGAS-deficient mice and further confirm an increased UPR response in the presence of the cGAS inhibitor. cGAS deficiency and inhibition in mice causes impaired autophagy flux in the liver Alcohol impairs autophagy and prevents the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes, which results in the accumulation of microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B–light-chain 3 (LC3) and p62 in the liver of ALD patients. 33 Furthermore, several studies have highlighted the interaction between cGAS and various autophagy components, including LC3 and p62. 9 34 Specifically, cGAS promotes autophagy when interacting with LC3, while its interaction with p62 leads to the degradation of cGAS. 9 34 35 Therefore, we assessed the levels of LC3-II and p62 by western blot in cGAS-KO mice. We found that LC3-II levels were significantly increased in cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 7 A, B). p62 levels were also increased in the alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 7 C, D). FIGURE 7 cGAS deficiency and inhibition cause dysregulated autophagy in the liver. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for LC3-I and LC3-II (A) and p62 (C). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for LC3-II (B) and p62 (D). Hepatocyte and immune cell lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblot was probed with LC3-I and LC3-II (E–G), and densitometric analysis is shown as a bar diagram (F–H). Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice (n=3–6) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for LC3-I and LC3-II (I), and p62 (K). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for LC3-II (J) and p62 (L). Primary hepatocytes (M, N) and BMDMs (O, P) were isolated from WT and cGAS-KO mice and were treated with or without 50 mM of alcohol (EtOH) for 24 hours, and bafilomycin A (100 nM) was added in the last 12 hours of the experiment. After 24 hours, protein levels from hepatocytes (M) and BMDMs (O) were analyzed by western blotting for LC3-I and LC3-II using β-actin as a loading control. The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for hepatocytes (N) and BMDMs (P). * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, and *** p ≤0.0005. Abbreviations: BMDMs, bone marrow–derived macrophages; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; LC3, microtubule-associated protein-1 light-chain 3; WT, wild type. Next, we isolated primary hepatocytes and immune cells from WT and cGAS-KO mice with water or alcohol gavage and assessed the levels of LC3-II by western blot (Figures 7 E–H). We observed an increasing trend in the level of LC3-II in primary hepatocytes of cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT alcohol alone and water-fed mice (Figures 7 E, F). Moreover, in liver immune cells, we observed a significant increase in LC3-II levels in cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 7 G, H). Next, we evaluated the effects of cGAS inhibition on markers of autophagy in WT mice. We found an increase in the level of LC3-II in alcohol-fed mice treated with the cGAS inhibitor compared with control mice (Figures 7 I, J). However, no significant difference was observed when comparing this group to alcohol-fed mice alone. Analysis of p62 by western blot revealed a significant increase in the level of p62 in the presence of alcohol, which was further elevated in mice administered both alcohol and the cGAS inhibitor (Figures 7 K, L). To further understand whether alcohol-induced accumulation of LC3-II and p62 in cGAS-deficient or cGAS inhibitor–administered mice is because of the impairment of autophagosome degradation, as reported earlier, 33 we used bafilomycin, an ATPase inhibitor, which prevents lysosome fusion with autophagosome. 33 We isolated primary hepatocytes and bone marrow–derived macrophages (BMDMs) from WT and cGAS-KO mice and treated them with alcohol in the presence and absence of bafilomycin (Figures 7 M–P). Bafilomycin treatment alone resulted in an increase in the LC3-II levels in WT hepatocytes and BMDMs (Figures 7 M–O). Furthermore, the combination of bafilomycin plus alcohol did not further increase LC3-II levels as compared with alcohol alone in WT hepatocytes (Figures 7 M, N) and BMDMs (Figures 7 O, P), suggesting impaired autophagy. Interestingly, in cGAS-KO hepatocytes, LC3-II levels were not increased by bafilomycin treatment (Figures 7 M, N). On the other hand, in BMDMs, bafilomycin treatment alone led to a significant increase in the LC3-II levels, which was not further increased by alcohol plus bafilomycin, indicative of a block in autophagic flux in BMDMs. These results suggest that perhaps LC3-II and p62 accumulation in cGAS-deficient and inhibitor mice are due to impaired autophagic flux. Restoring cyclic GMP–AMP (cGAMP) levels in the presence of cGAS inhibitors ameliorates liver damage by restoring autophagy Exogenous cGAMP has previously been shown to improve obesity-associated metabolic dysregulation. 14 Therefore, we hypothesized that restoring the cGAMP levels could alleviate liver injury. To further validate this hypothesis, WT mice that were administered alcohol were treated with either 2′–3′cGAMP (thereafter referred to as cGAMP) or a control, as mentioned in the “Methods” section (Figure 8 A). Administering cGAMP to alcohol-fed mice that were also treated with RU.521 resulted in a significant reduction in the ALT and AST as compared with alcohol-fed mice treated with RU.521 (Figures 8 B, C). FIGURE 8 Exogenously administering cGAMP in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor improves liver damage. (A) Feeding schematics for administration of alcohol, cGAS inhibitor, and cGAMP in C57BL/6J WT mice. (B) ALT level was measured from serum. (C) AST level was measured from serum. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, EtOH + cGAS inhibitor, and EtOH + RU.521 + cGAMP mice (n=4–5) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for LC3-I and LC3-II (D), and p62 (F). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for LC3-II (E) and p62 (G). Model summarizing the pathways affected in cGAS-KO mice (H). created with BioRender.com. * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, and *** p ≤0.0005. Abbreviations: BAX, Bcl-2-associated protein X; cGAMP, 2′–3′ cyclic GMP–AMP; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; CHOP, C/EBP-homologous protein; LC3, microtubule-associated protein-1 light-chain 3; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; MIF, Migration inhibitory factor; XBP1s, X-box binding protein 1s; WT, wild type. In vivo study showed that inducing autophagy in cGAS-deficient mice reduces cell death during liver ischemia/reperfusion injury. 12 Building on this, we further hypothesized that administering cGAMP caused a reduction in cell death by restoring autophagic flux. To further confirm this hypothesis, we evaluated the levels of autophagy markers, specifically LC3 and p62. We found that LC3-II levels were significantly increased in mice administered with alcohol plus RU.521 group and in the alcohol plus RU.521 plus cGAMP mice group, as compared with alcohol-only mice (Figures 8 D, E). However, no significant difference was observed in alcohol plus RU.521 mice and alcohol plus RU.521 plus cGAMP mice (Figures 8 D, E). Notably, the p62 levels were significantly reduced in the alcohol plus RU.521 plus cGAMP group of mice as compared with alcohol plus RU.521 mice, suggesting an improved autophagic flux. Overall, these results indicate that restoring cGAMP levels exogenously, along with cGAS inhibition in the presence of alcohol, alleviates liver injury by restoring the levels of LC3-II and p62 and probably by restoring autophagic flux.


## cGAS deficiency or cGAS inhibition increases liver damage
To investigate the effect of cGAS deficiency in early ALD, we administered a single acute alcohol gavage to global cGAS knockout mice (referred to as cGAS-KO), as shown in Figure 1 A. A previous study using an acute-on-chronic ALD model (the NIAAA model) indicated that cGAS-KO mice were protected against liver damage. 16 Surprisingly, our findings revealed significantly higher ALT levels in the cGAS-KO mice following alcohol gavage compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figure 1 B). Higher AST levels were observed in WT alcohol-fed mice as compared with controls (Figure 1 C). Notably, cGAS-KO mice, irrespective of alcohol administration, exhibited increased AST levels as compared with controls (Figure 1 C). Further, histological assessments of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained liver sections did not show any significant differences in WT and cGAS-KO after the alcohol binge (Figure 1 D). To further understand if cGAS-KO has impaired alcohol metabolism, which can contribute to liver injury, we next checked the serum blood alcohol levels (Figure 1 E). We did not observe any significant difference in blood alcohol levels between WT alcohol-fed mice and cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice (Figure 1 E). These results suggest that cGAS deletion does not impair alcohol metabolism (Figure 1 E). FIGURE 1 Absence or depletion of cGAS increases liver damage. (A) Feeding schematics for alcohol administration in WT and cGAS-KO mice. A 5 g/kg alcohol intra-gastric gavage was administered to WT and cGAS-KO mice. (B, C) ALT and AST levels were measured from serum. (D) Formalin-fixed liver sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and representative images are shown. (E) Blood alcohol level was measured from serum. (F) Feeding schematics for administration of alcohol and cGAS inhibitor in C57BL/6J WT mice. (G, H) ALT and AST levels were measured from serum. (I) Formalin-fixed liver sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and representative images are shown. created with BioRender.com. Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, *** p ≤0.0005, and **** p <0.0001. Abbreviations: cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; WT, wild type. To further validate our observation of increased liver damage in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice, we treated WT mice with a small molecule inhibitor of cGAS, RU.521, which was previously shown to attenuate interferon expression. 18 RU.521 was administered 1 hour before the intra-gastric gavage of acute alcohol, with a control group receiving only the alcohol gavage, as depicted in Figure 1 C. The serum ALT and AST levels were significantly elevated in the group treated with the cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol compared with the alcohol-only group and the control mice (Figures 1 D, E). However, we did not observe any changes in the H&E-stained liver sections of cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol compared with the alcohol-only group and the control mice (Figure 1 I). An increase in transaminases indicates that cGAS deficiency or inhibition exacerbates alcohol-induced liver damage in the early stages of ALD. These results suggest that cGAS may play a distinct role in the acute binge model compared with the NIAAA model of ALD, potentially serving a protective role in the early stages of ALD.


## cGAS deficiency and cGAS inhibition increase alcohol-induced cell death in the liver in mice
Given our observation that alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice had significantly higher ALT as compared with alcohol-fed WT mice, we evaluated apoptosis markers in WT and cGAS-KO mice after alcohol or water gavage. During apoptosis, BAX promotes the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria, while caspase-3 cleaves poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1). As a result, both BAX and cleaved PARP serve as hallmarks of apoptosis. 19 We found a significant increase in BAX levels in the livers of cGAS-KO mice in the presence of alcohol as compared with WT alcohol mice (Figures 2 A, B and Supplemental Figure S1, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ). Similarly, we observed a significant increase in cleaved PARP levels in the livers of alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice (Figures 2 C, D). FIGURE 2 cGAS-KO and cGAS inhibitor–administered mice's liver is predisposed to alcohol-induced cell death. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for BAX (A) and cleaved PARP (C). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for BAX (B) and Clv-PARP (D). Hepatocyte lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered WT and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. The immunoblot was probed with an anti–cleaved caspase-3 antibody, and densitometric analysis is shown as a bar diagram (E, F). Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice (n=3–6) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for cleaved caspase-3 (E) and cleaved PARP (G). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for cleaved caspase-3 (F) and cleaved PARP (H). TUNEL assay was performed on liver sections of WT and cGAS-KO mice (K, L) and cGAS inhibitor mice using WT as a control (M, N). Quantification of TUNEL + cells in (L) and (N). Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05 and ** p ≤0.005. Abbreviations: BAX, Bcl-2–associated protein X; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; WT, wild type. Activation of the STING–IRF3 signaling pathway downstream of cGAS induces hepatocyte apoptosis in early stages of ALD. 10 Therefore, we next checked the level of cleaved caspase-3 in hepatocytes isolated from WT and cGAS-KO mice after alcohol or water gavage. We found a significant increase in cleaved caspase-3 levels in the primary hepatocytes of cGAS-KO mice after alcohol gavage compared with WT alcohol mice (Figures 2 E, F). Given our observation that cGAS deficiency predisposed the liver to increased alcohol-induced cell death, we next evaluated the role of the cGAS inhibitor in this process. We found that WT mice administered with alcohol and RU.521 showed a dramatic increase in the level of cleaved caspase-3 as compared with alcohol-fed mice (Figures 2 G, H). Similarly, the level of cleaved PARP was also elevated in the presence of the cGAS inhibitor in alcohol-fed mice compared with those fed alcohol alone (Figures 2 I, J). These results corroborate our findings from cGAS-KO, indicating that cGAS inhibition predisposes the liver to alcohol-induced apoptosis. We found a significant increase in TUNEL + cells in WT EtOH and cGAS-KO EtOH as compared with WT-water (Figures 2 K, L). Similarly, we observed an increasing trend in TUNEL + cells in WT mice administered with alcohol and cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol alone and water alone, suggesting increased apoptosis after alcohol administration in WT and cGAS-KO mice. Previous studies have implicated the role of cGAS in necroptosis; 20 21 22 therefore, we next assessed the markers of necroptosis in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor (Supplemental Figure S2, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ) by western blot. We observed no significant changes in the levels of necroptosis marker RIPK1 (Supplemental Figures S2A, B, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ), RIPK3 (Supplemental Figures S2D, E, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ), and MLKL (Supplemental Figures S2A–C, http://links.lww.com/HC9/C247 ) in alcohol-fed mice administered with cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol-fed mice alone. These results suggest that the deficiency of cGAS and cGAS inhibition makes the liver more susceptible to alcohol-induced apoptosis but not necroptosis.


## Acute alcohol exposure increases the chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment in cGAS deficiency and inhibition
Neutrophil infiltration is one of the hallmarks of ALD pathogenesis. 1 2 Earlier studies have shown hepatocyte damage leads to increased production of chemokines, which in turn recruit neutrophils and cause neutrophilia in ALD. 2 23 24 Based on this understanding, we hypothesized that increased cell death resulting from cGAS deficiency or inhibition might elevate chemokine production, prompting neutrophil recruitment. Consistent with this hypothesis, we found a dramatic increase in the level of lipocalin-2 (LCN2) and neutrophil elastase (NE) in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 3 A, B). FIGURE 3 cGAS deficiency and inhibition increase the chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment. (A–C) Whole-cell liver lysates from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) were used to detect LCN2 (A), NE (B), and CXCL1 (C) by ELISA. (D) Paraffin-embedded liver sections of control or EtOH mice, WT, and cGAS-KO mice were stained for Ly6G, and representative images are shown. (E–G) Whole-cell liver lysates from control, EtOH, and EtOH plus RU.521 were used to detect LCN2 (D), NE (E), and CXCL1 (F) by ELISA. (G) Paraffin-embedded liver sections from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice were stained for Ly6G, and representative images are shown. Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, *** p ≤0.0005, and **** p <0.0001. Abbreviations: cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; CXCL1, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1; LCN2, lipocalin-2; NE, neutrophil elastase; WT, wild type. Notably, the levels of LCN2 and NE in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice were significantly higher than those in control cGAS-KO mice, suggesting that alcohol induces a greater increase of these chemokines in cGAS-KO mice (Figures 3 A, B). However, CXCL1 levels were unaltered in cGAS-KO mice as compared with alcohol-fed WT mice (Figure 3 C). In addition, we observed a significant increase in the Ly6G + cells, as assessed by immunohistochemistry staining of liver sections in cGAS-KO after alcohol treatment, as compared with WT control, but no significant difference between WT and cGAS-KO alcohol mice (Figure 3 D). Consistent with these findings, we found a significant increase in the LCN2 levels in alcohol-fed WT mice administered with cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol-fed mice alone (Figure 3 E). NE was significantly increased in the WT alcohol-fed mice, but no additional increase was seen in the presence of cGAS inhibitor (Figure 3 F). Moreover, CXCL1 levels remain unaltered in alcohol-fed mice regardless of the presence or absence of cGAS inhibitors, compared with control mice (Figure 3 G). Similarly, we observed a significant increase in the Ly6G + cells in WT mice administered with cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol as compared with alcohol alone and water alone mice (Figure 3 H). These results suggest an increase in the chemokine involved in neutrophil recruitment with cGAS deficiency and inhibition in early ALD, which escalates neutrophil recruitment during the later stages of ALD, thereby promoting its pathogenesis.


## Macrophage inhibitory factor is elevated in cGAS-deficient mice and in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor
ALD is characterized by hepatocyte death and increased inflammation. 1 2 Therefore, we analyzed inflammatory markers in relation to cGAS deficiency and inhibition. Hepatocyte death causes the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and macrophage inhibitory protein (MIF). 1 2 25 26 Our findings indicated that hepatic levels of IL-1β and MCP-1 were not significantly altered following single alcohol gavage in either WT or cGAS-KO mice (Figures 4 A, B). However, MIF levels in the liver were significantly increased in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figure 4 C). Interestingly, MIF levels were elevated in cGAS-KO mice even without alcohol administration (Figure 4 C). Acute alcohol gavage was previously shown to decrease F4/80 positive cells in liver. 27 Irrespective of the genotype, we observed a significant reduction in the mRNA level of F4/80 in WT and cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT-water and cGAS-KO water, respectively (Figure 4 D). We next evaluated hepatic macrophages by CD68 immunohistochemistry (Figure 4 E). Quantification of CD68-stained cells displayed a significant increase in WT and cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with respective controls (Figure 4 F). FIGURE 4 Inflammatory markers in cGAS-deficient mice and in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor. (A–C) Whole-cell liver lysates from control or EtOH-administered, WT and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) were used to detect IL-1β (A), MCP-1 (B), and MIF (C) by ELISA. (E) Paraffin-embedded liver sections of control or EtOH mice, WT, and cGAS-KO mice were stained for CD68, and representative images are shown. (F) CD68 + cells were quantified using ImageJ software and presented as a bar graph. (G–I) Whole-cell liver lysates from control, EtOH, and EtOH plus RU.521 were used to detect IL-1β (G), MCP-1 (H), and MIF (I) by ELISA. (J) Paraffin-embedded liver sections from control, EtOH, and EtOH plus RU.521 mice were stained for CD68, and representative images are shown. (K) CD68 + cells were quantified using ImageJ software and presented as a bar graph. Scale bar=50 μm; * p ≤0.05, ** p <0.005, and **** p <0.0001. Abbreviations: cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; IL-1β, interleukin 1 beta; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; MIF, migration inhibitory factor; WT, wild type. Next, we assessed the level of inflammatory markers in the alcohol-fed mice in the presence and absence of the cGAS inhibitor. We found that there was no change in the levels of IL-1β in alcohol-fed mice in the absence or presence of cGAS inhibitor (Figure 4 G). In contrast, MCP-1 levels were significantly higher in the alcohol-fed mice administered with the cGAS inhibitor compared with those without the inhibitor (Figure 4 H). In addition, MIF showed a similar pattern as observed in the cGAS-KO mice, showing a dramatic increase in the alcohol-fed mice in the presence of cGAS inhibitor (Figure 4 I). CD68 + cells, as assessed by immunohistochemistry, were significantly increased in the alcohol-fed WT mice administered with cGAS inhibitor as compared with alcohol-fed mice alone and water alone (Figures 4 J, K). These results suggest that cGAS depletion or deficiency leads to an increased production of the cytokine MIF and infiltration of CD68 + cells.


## UPR is increased in the liver of cGAS-deficient mice
It has been reported that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and UPR cause hepatocyte inflammation and cell death, which in turn contribute to the pathogenesis of ALD. 4 5 25 An earlier study showed that MIF is upstream and regulates UPR pathway as MIF-deficient mice have reduced activation of UPR pathway and decreased liver damage, induced by alcohol. 26 28 29 Our observation that MIF levels are elevated in cGAS-KO mice prompted us to evaluate the levels of various components of the UPR pathways. The UPR pathway comprises 3 signaling pathways: the type I transmembrane protein inositol-requiring enzyme 1α (IRE1α), protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6). 30 31 Activation of IRE1α causes splicing of X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1), which translocates to the nucleus and regulates the transcription of UPR target genes. 30 31 Activation of ATF6 increases the transcription of GRP94 and activates C/EBP-homologous protein (CHOP). Similarly, activation of PERK causes phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2α (eIF2α) and the activation of CHOP. 30 31 XBP1s was slightly increased in WT alcohol-fed mice, which further increased significantly in alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice (Figures 5 A, B). Control WT and cGAS-KO mice exhibited similar levels of XBP1, suggesting that the increase in XBP1 is due to alcohol-induced activation of the UPR pathway in cGAS-KO mice. ATF6 levels were increased in cGAS-KO mice as compared with control WT mice; however, there was no further increase in the presence of alcohol (Figures 5 C, D). Similarly, GRP94 levels showed increasing levels in cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT mice, but no further significant change was observed because of alcohol administration (Figures 6 F, G). Next, we assessed the activation of the PERK pathway by analyzing the level of p-eIF2α and CHOP in WT and cGAS-KO mice. p-eIF2α level remains unaffected by alcohol administration in both WT and cGAS-KO mice (Figures 5 C, E). While CHOP levels showed an increasing trend in the alcohol-fed WT mice, they were significantly increased in control cGAS-KO mice compared with control WT mice (Figures 5 H, I). FIGURE 5 cGAS deficiency increases unfolded protein response in mice. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for XBP1s (A), ATF6, p-eif2α, T-eif2α (C), Grp94 (F), and CHOP (H). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for XBP1s (B), ATF6 (D), p-eif2α and T-eif2α (E), Grp94 (G), and CHOP (I). Whole-cell hepatocyte lysates were extracted from control or EtOH mice, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4), and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for XBP1s (J) and CHOP (J). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for XBP1s (K) and CHOP (L). * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, and *** p ≤0.0005. Abbreviations: ATF6, activating transcription factor 6; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; CHOP, C/EBP-homologous protein; XBP1, X-box binding protein-1; WT, wild type. FIGURE 6 Unfolded protein response is increased in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice (n=3–6) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for XBP1s (A), ATF6, p-eif2α, and T-eif2α (C), Grp94 (F), and CHOP (H). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for XBP1s (B), ATF6 (D), p-eif2α and T-eif2α (E), Grp94 (G), and CHOP (I). * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005. Abbreviations: ATF6, activating transcription factor 6; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; CHOP, C/EBP-homologous protein; XBP1, X-box binding protein-1; WT, wild type. Persistent UPR pathway activation in ALD is associated with inflammation and hepatocyte apoptosis; 4 32 therefore, we checked the levels of XBP1s and CHOP in hepatocytes isolated from WT and cGAS-KO mice (Figures 5 J–L). We observed a significant increase in the level of XBP1s in WT EtOH-fed mice as compared with water, which was further significantly increased in the cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 5 J, K). Similarly, the levels of CHOP were significantly increased in the cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with cGAS-KO water-fed mice (Figures 5 J–L). These results suggest an increase in UPR response in hepatocytes and cGAS-KO mice, which might contribute to increased cell death in the presence of alcohol.


## cGAS inhibition increases unfolded protein response in mice
To further understand the UPR pathway response to a significant increase in MIF in the mice administered with cGAS inhibitor plus alcohol, we examined the levels of different molecules of the UPR pathways. We found the significantly increased level of XBP1s in WT alcohol-fed mice, but this level did not further increase with the administration of the cGAS inhibitor (Figures 6 A, B). ATF6 levels were substantially increased in the presence of cGAS inhibitors as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice alone (Figures 6 C, D). Downstream of ATF6, we found a similar pattern in the expression of Grp94, which was significantly increased in the presence of cGAS inhibitor as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 6 F, G). However, levels of p-eIF2α, which are downstream of PERK activation, were not altered by either alcohol or cGAS inhibitor when compared with control gavage mice (Figures 6 C, E). CHOP levels were increased in mice fed with cGAS inhibitor as compared with control and alcohol alone mice (Figures 6 H, I). These results corroborate the findings from cGAS-deficient mice and further confirm an increased UPR response in the presence of the cGAS inhibitor.


## cGAS deficiency and inhibition in mice causes impaired autophagy flux in the liver
Alcohol impairs autophagy and prevents the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes, which results in the accumulation of microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B–light-chain 3 (LC3) and p62 in the liver of ALD patients. 33 Furthermore, several studies have highlighted the interaction between cGAS and various autophagy components, including LC3 and p62. 9 34 Specifically, cGAS promotes autophagy when interacting with LC3, while its interaction with p62 leads to the degradation of cGAS. 9 34 35 Therefore, we assessed the levels of LC3-II and p62 by western blot in cGAS-KO mice. We found that LC3-II levels were significantly increased in cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 7 A, B). p62 levels were also increased in the alcohol-fed cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 7 C, D). FIGURE 7 cGAS deficiency and inhibition cause dysregulated autophagy in the liver. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for LC3-I and LC3-II (A) and p62 (C). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for LC3-II (B) and p62 (D). Hepatocyte and immune cell lysates were extracted from control or EtOH-administered, WT, and cGAS-KO mice (n=3–4) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblot was probed with LC3-I and LC3-II (E–G), and densitometric analysis is shown as a bar diagram (F–H). Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, and EtOH + cGAS inhibitor mice (n=3–6) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for LC3-I and LC3-II (I), and p62 (K). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for LC3-II (J) and p62 (L). Primary hepatocytes (M, N) and BMDMs (O, P) were isolated from WT and cGAS-KO mice and were treated with or without 50 mM of alcohol (EtOH) for 24 hours, and bafilomycin A (100 nM) was added in the last 12 hours of the experiment. After 24 hours, protein levels from hepatocytes (M) and BMDMs (O) were analyzed by western blotting for LC3-I and LC3-II using β-actin as a loading control. The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for hepatocytes (N) and BMDMs (P). * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, and *** p ≤0.0005. Abbreviations: BMDMs, bone marrow–derived macrophages; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; LC3, microtubule-associated protein-1 light-chain 3; WT, wild type. Next, we isolated primary hepatocytes and immune cells from WT and cGAS-KO mice with water or alcohol gavage and assessed the levels of LC3-II by western blot (Figures 7 E–H). We observed an increasing trend in the level of LC3-II in primary hepatocytes of cGAS-KO alcohol-fed mice as compared with WT alcohol alone and water-fed mice (Figures 7 E, F). Moreover, in liver immune cells, we observed a significant increase in LC3-II levels in cGAS-KO mice as compared with WT alcohol-fed mice (Figures 7 G, H). Next, we evaluated the effects of cGAS inhibition on markers of autophagy in WT mice. We found an increase in the level of LC3-II in alcohol-fed mice treated with the cGAS inhibitor compared with control mice (Figures 7 I, J). However, no significant difference was observed when comparing this group to alcohol-fed mice alone. Analysis of p62 by western blot revealed a significant increase in the level of p62 in the presence of alcohol, which was further elevated in mice administered both alcohol and the cGAS inhibitor (Figures 7 K, L). To further understand whether alcohol-induced accumulation of LC3-II and p62 in cGAS-deficient or cGAS inhibitor–administered mice is because of the impairment of autophagosome degradation, as reported earlier, 33 we used bafilomycin, an ATPase inhibitor, which prevents lysosome fusion with autophagosome. 33 We isolated primary hepatocytes and bone marrow–derived macrophages (BMDMs) from WT and cGAS-KO mice and treated them with alcohol in the presence and absence of bafilomycin (Figures 7 M–P). Bafilomycin treatment alone resulted in an increase in the LC3-II levels in WT hepatocytes and BMDMs (Figures 7 M–O). Furthermore, the combination of bafilomycin plus alcohol did not further increase LC3-II levels as compared with alcohol alone in WT hepatocytes (Figures 7 M, N) and BMDMs (Figures 7 O, P), suggesting impaired autophagy. Interestingly, in cGAS-KO hepatocytes, LC3-II levels were not increased by bafilomycin treatment (Figures 7 M, N). On the other hand, in BMDMs, bafilomycin treatment alone led to a significant increase in the LC3-II levels, which was not further increased by alcohol plus bafilomycin, indicative of a block in autophagic flux in BMDMs. These results suggest that perhaps LC3-II and p62 accumulation in cGAS-deficient and inhibitor mice are due to impaired autophagic flux.


## Restoring cyclic GMP–AMP (cGAMP) levels in the presence of cGAS inhibitors ameliorates liver damage by restoring autophagy
Exogenous cGAMP has previously been shown to improve obesity-associated metabolic dysregulation. 14 Therefore, we hypothesized that restoring the cGAMP levels could alleviate liver injury. To further validate this hypothesis, WT mice that were administered alcohol were treated with either 2′–3′cGAMP (thereafter referred to as cGAMP) or a control, as mentioned in the “Methods” section (Figure 8 A). Administering cGAMP to alcohol-fed mice that were also treated with RU.521 resulted in a significant reduction in the ALT and AST as compared with alcohol-fed mice treated with RU.521 (Figures 8 B, C). FIGURE 8 Exogenously administering cGAMP in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor improves liver damage. (A) Feeding schematics for administration of alcohol, cGAS inhibitor, and cGAMP in C57BL/6J WT mice. (B) ALT level was measured from serum. (C) AST level was measured from serum. Whole-cell liver lysates were extracted from control, EtOH, EtOH + cGAS inhibitor, and EtOH + RU.521 + cGAMP mice (n=4–5) and analyzed by western blotting using β-actin as a loading control. Immunoblots were probed with antibodies for LC3-I and LC3-II (D), and p62 (F). The densitometry analysis is shown as bar diagrams for LC3-II (E) and p62 (G). Model summarizing the pathways affected in cGAS-KO mice (H). created with BioRender.com. * p ≤0.05, ** p ≤0.005, and *** p ≤0.0005. Abbreviations: BAX, Bcl-2-associated protein X; cGAMP, 2′–3′ cyclic GMP–AMP; cGAS, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase; cGAS-KO, cGAS knockout; CHOP, C/EBP-homologous protein; LC3, microtubule-associated protein-1 light-chain 3; MCP-1, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1; MIF, Migration inhibitory factor; XBP1s, X-box binding protein 1s; WT, wild type. In vivo study showed that inducing autophagy in cGAS-deficient mice reduces cell death during liver ischemia/reperfusion injury. 12 Building on this, we further hypothesized that administering cGAMP caused a reduction in cell death by restoring autophagic flux. To further confirm this hypothesis, we evaluated the levels of autophagy markers, specifically LC3 and p62. We found that LC3-II levels were significantly increased in mice administered with alcohol plus RU.521 group and in the alcohol plus RU.521 plus cGAMP mice group, as compared with alcohol-only mice (Figures 8 D, E). However, no significant difference was observed in alcohol plus RU.521 mice and alcohol plus RU.521 plus cGAMP mice (Figures 8 D, E). Notably, the p62 levels were significantly reduced in the alcohol plus RU.521 plus cGAMP group of mice as compared with alcohol plus RU.521 mice, suggesting an improved autophagic flux. Overall, these results indicate that restoring cGAMP levels exogenously, along with cGAS inhibition in the presence of alcohol, alleviates liver injury by restoring the levels of LC3-II and p62 and probably by restoring autophagic flux.


## DISCUSSION
The innate immune response plays an indispensable role in driving the pathogenesis of alcohol-associated hepatitis (AH). 1 2 3 The intracellular cGAS is a part of the innate immune response, which, upon activation by dsDNA, produces cGAMP, which in turn activates the STING–IRF3 signaling pathway and leads to the production of type 1 interferons. 7 8 9 11 In the present study, we demonstrate that cGAS deficiency or inhibition in mice worsens liver damage, induces apoptosis, and impairs autophagic flux (Figure 8 H). We also show that deletion or inhibition of cGAS increases LCN2, NE, and MIF production, and there is upregulation of UPR pathways (Figure 8 H). The regulatory role of cGAS is further highlighted by the observation that restoring cGAMP levels in alcohol treated mice in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor can ameliorate liver damage and restore autophagic flux. Here, we show that a single acute intra-gastric alcohol administration in cGAS-deficient mice or in the presence of a cGAS inhibitor, RU.521, results in increased liver injury. Moreover, we found an increase in cell death as evidenced by an increase in cleaved caspase-3 in total liver and in primary hepatocytes, and the TUNEL assay. In line with these results, in the acute setting of sterile injury induced by ischemia–reperfusion (I/R) injury that deletion of cGAS was reported to aggravate liver injury by increasing apoptosis. 12 Similarly, cGAS-KO mice fed for 16 weeks on a high-fat-cholesterol-sucrose diet (hereby referred to as MASH diet) caused increased liver damage. 13 Intriguingly, mice deficient in interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), which has impaired type I IFN production, showed increased liver damage and inflammation, highlighting the protective role of IFNs. 36 In contrast, in the NIAAA model of ALD and in a mouse model of acute liver injury caused by cecum ligation and puncture (CLP) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus D-galactosamine (GalN), cGAS deficiency protected against liver injury. 15 16 In early ALD, alcohol-induced ER stress and STING activates IRF3 which is associated with Bax and causes hepatocyte apoptosis. 10 Together with our current report, these studies highlight that cGAS likely plays a different role in different types of liver injuries. Our study implies a protective role of cGAS in early ALD, highlighting that cGAS might act as a “gatekeeper” and protector from the alcohol-induced liver damage in acute versus chronic injury settings. cGAS is previously shown to detect cytosolic DNA and trigger necroptosis. 20 21 22 However, in the current study, cGAS inhibition only caused an increase in apoptosis marker and necroptosis marker RIPK, RIPK3, and MLKL remained unaltered, further reinstating that cGAS inhibition causes alcohol-induced apoptosis but not necroptosis. Increase in neutrophils in both the circulation and the liver, is one of the characteristic features of ALD and it correlates with poor clinical outcomes. 24 In this study, we observed an increase in chemokines involved in neutrophil infiltration, such as LCN2 and NE levels in alcohol-fed mice, which was even more pronounced in alcohol-fed cGAS-deficient mice. However, in both cGAS deficiency and inhibition, we have observed an increase in Ly6G + cells after 9 hours of alcohol gavage. Previous studies in humans have shown that blood alcohol concentration peaks after 1–4 hours of alcohol binge, which positively correlates with neutrophil infiltration, which decreases after 4 hours of alcohol consumption. 37 38 Since in our study we studied neutrophil infiltration after 9 hours, it is possible that we missed an even earlier timepoint for the neutrophil infiltration. Increase in the chemokines is in line with a previous study that demonstrated the importance of intercellular communication between damaged hepatocytes and neutrophils during the stages of pathogenesis in metabolic dysfunction and alcohol-associated liver disease (MetALD). 39 Damaged hepatocytes induce the production of chemokines CXCL1 and LCN2, which recruit neutrophils to the liver. 23 Another study has shown that LCN2 is crucial in mediating alcohol-induced neutrophilia. 40 Mice lacking LCN2 were protected from ALD, exhibiting reduced neutrophil infiltration and decreased liver injury. 40 Furthermore, in cGAS-deficient mice exposed to alcohol, there is an increase in LCN2 and NE, potentially contributing to increased neutrophil infiltration and liver damage. Alcohol exposure causes an increase in inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as IL-1β, MCP-1, and MIF levels both in mice models and patients with ALD. 3 41 Furthermore, MIF is expressed by both parenchymal and non-parenchymal cells, especially in proximity to accumulated neutrophils and ballooned hepatocytes. 26 29 MIF-deficient mice are protected from alcohol-induced immune cell infiltration, hepatocyte damage, and steatosis. 26 29 In the current study, we show a significant increase in MIF both in cGAS-KO and cGAS inhibitor–treated mice. Interestingly, another study showed that MIF-deficient mice, independent of neutrophil infiltration and inflammation, is associated with induction of UPR pathway and have reduced the liver injury induced by alcohol. 28 In this study, we observed an increase in different arms of UPR pathways, such as XBP1s, CHOP, Grp94, and ATF6 in alcohol-fed mice treated with cGAS inhibitor. Together, these results suggest that an increase in pleiotropic MIF may have a causal relationship in the induction of the UPR pathway and increased liver damage found in cGAS-deficient mice. The mechanistic details of how cGAS regulates MIF expression will need further investigation. Alcohol consumption both activates and inhibits autophagy. 6 33 Studies have shown that alcohol induces autophagy via mTORC1 and induces LC3 lipidation but prevents the fusion of autophagosome to lysosome, therefore resulting in the accumulation of autophagosomes decorated with p62. 33 cGAS induces autophagy by binding to Beclin-1 and promoting conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II. 9 34 42 Furthermore, cGAS interacts with p62 and promotes its own degradation. 34 35 In our study, we observed that cGAS deletion or inhibition causes increased LC3-II and p62 levels. Moreover, in our bafilomycin experiment in hepatocytes and BMDMs, we found an increase in the level of LC3-II by bafilomycin, which was not further increased by the bafilomycin plus alcohol, suggesting impairment in autophagic flux. Similarly, in I/R liver injury, cGAS deletion causes impaired autophagy in hepatocytes and induction of autophagy by rapamycin alleviated liver damage. 12 Furthermore, we observed that restoring cGAMP levels, after cGAS inhibition, attenuated liver damage and restored autophagic flux. We found decreased transaminases and p62 levels in the livers of mice in which cGAMP levels were restored. In line with this work, an exogenous administration of cGAMP in HFD-fed mice improved insulin resistance and decreased fat deposition. 14 In addition, restoring cGAMP also decreased liver injury and inflammation in HFD-fed mice. 14 These data corroborate our findings that restoring cGAMP levels in cGAS inhibitor–treated mice in the presence of alcohol alleviates liver injury as observed by transaminase levels and through autophagic flux. This study provides evidence that cGAS deficiency impacts various signaling pathways, such as UPR, autophagy, and immune cell infiltration after an alcohol binge in the liver. However, further mechanistic studies may help to understand the cell-specific role of cGAS in hepatocytes and immune cells. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that cGAS deficiency or inhibition exacerbates early ALD pathogenesis that may involve an increase in MIF and dysregulated autophagy. Our results confirm that cGAS has a protective role in early stages of ALD-related liver damage, cell death, and inflammation.
