TITLE: Permeability of 16 Straight‐ and Branched‐Chain Parabens Using the Caco‐2 Assay
PMID: 40908666
PMC: 
------------------------------------------------------------

# ABSTRACT
ABSTRACT The in vitro intestinal permeability of straight‐ and branched‐chain parabens has not been extensively investigated. Sixteen parabens were tested in the Caco‐2 assay. Passive diffusion was measured using PAMPA. The transport of the MCT1 substrate, p ‐coumaric acid, as well as propylparaben and isopropylparaben, was investigated. For straight‐chain parabens, P app A‐B and P app B‐A decreased with increasing chain length and LogP. P app B‐A values were similar to PAMPA permeability (P app PAMPA ), indicating passive diffusion. Losses in mass balance were due to non‐specific binding, accumulation in the cells, and/or hydrolysis to 4‐hydroxybenzoic acid (4‐HBA). The extent of hydrolysis of straight‐chain parabens was inversely proportional to their LogP, suggesting they are carboxylesterase‐1 (CES1) substrates. For C1–C5 straight‐chain parabens, P app A‐B was higher than P app B‐A , indicating vectoral permeability. Transport of parent propylparaben was passive and pH‐independent, but 4‐HBA formed was actively transported out of the cells, which was pH‐dependent. This indicated the involvement of apical MCT1 transporters (their presence was confirmed using p ‐coumaric acid). Kinetics measurements suggested that efflux of 4‐HBA is predominantly via the basolateral membrane. Branched‐chain parabens with good passive diffusion were poor CES1 substrates but may be transported via processes other than 4‐HBA MCT1 efflux. In conclusion, P app values for parabens are best calculated using parent chemical and 4‐HBA. The extent of vectoral permeability of straight‐chain but not branched‐chain parabens is correlated to the extent of hydrolysis and the concentration‐dependent contribution of passive vs. active efflux of parent and 4‐HBA, respectively.
Sixteen straight‐ and branched‐chain parabens were tested in the Caco‐2 assay. P app values for parabens are best calculated using parent chemical and 4‐HBA. P app B‐A permeability was via passive diffusion. Transport of parent C1–C5 straight‐chain parabens was passive and pH‐independent but 4‐HBA formed was actively transported in the A to B direction by apical MCT1 transporters. The extent of vectoral permeability of straight‐chain but not branched‐chain parabens is correlated to the extent of hydrolysis and the concentration‐dependent contribution of passive vs. active efflux of parent and 4‐HBA, respectively.

# BODY
## Introduction
1 Introduction Parabens are alkyl esters of 4‐hydroxybenzoic acid (4‐HBA) and are effective antimicrobials. This property has led to their use, especially the short chain parabens, in personal care products, e.g., cosmetics, food and medicinal products (Brand et al. 2017 ; Jewell et al. 2007 ). In light of the European Union animal testing ban which came into full effect in 2013 (EU 2009 ), safety assessments for cosmetic ingredients are now conducted using in silico and in vitro models, so‐called “New Approach Methodologies” (Alexander‐White et al. 2022 ; Dent et al. 2021 ). Therefore, in the absence of in vivo human data, the best estimation of plasma concentrations must rely on quality in vitro data. For example, in the read‐across Next Generation Risk Assessment of propylparaben conducted by Ouedraogo et al. ( 2022 ), the propylparaben PBK model was built and refined using in vitro skin metabolism and penetration data for methyl‐, ethyl‐ and butylparaben. The generation of reliable in vitro ADME data for PBK modelling is therefore important for read‐across evaluations and assessments that depend on predictions of internal exposure. In previous studies, we measured the human plasma protein binding and metabolism of 16 straight‐ and branched‐chain parabens in in vitro human skin and liver S9 assays (Lester et al. 2021 ). The parabens tested (shown in Figure 1 ) differed widely in their lipophilicity (LogP values ranged from 1.87 to 7.4) (see a range of physicochemical properties in Table S1 ), which was shown to be linked to their respective metabolism by skin and liver carboxylesterases. In liver S9, the in vitro intrinsic clearance (CL int, in vitro ) of the straight‐chain parabens generally decreased with increasing chain length (and thus, LogP), whereas it increased with increasing chain length in incubations with skin S9. An interesting finding from these metabolism studies was that the presence of a branched‐chain altered the affinity of the paraben for carboxylesterase‐1 (CES1) in liver S9 but not CES2 in skin S9. Considering this, we investigated how the LogP and structure of the same 16 parabens impact their permeability across Caco‐2 monolayers, a test system routinely used to estimate intestinal absorption in humans (Artursson et al. 2001 ; Bohets et al. 2001 ; Krishna et al. 2001 ; Shah et al. 2006 ). FIGURE 1 Structures of straight‐chain and branched chain parabens tested. It is reported that the short‐chain parabens, methyl and propyl paraben, are rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract in animals and humans (Soni et al. 2005 ); however, the in vivo absorption and in vitro permeability of longer chain and branched chain parabens have not been extensively investigated. Until the report of Lakeram, Lockley, et al. ( 2007 ) showing that pre‐systemic metabolism of parabens occurs in the intestine, it was previously thought that parabens were only hydrolyzed by kidney and hepatic esterases (Andersen 2008 ). Lakeram et al. showed that the major paraben metabolite, 4‐hydroxybenzoic acid (4‐HBA), was formed in the Caco‐2 cells and was transported with the parent paraben into the receiver compartment (Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2007 ; Lakeram, Paine, et al. 2006 ). They proposed that the mechanism of preferential absorptive permeability of parabens in the A‐to‐B (A‐B) direction was due to the active transport of 4‐HBA out of the cell via the monocarboxylic acid transporter (MCT) located on the basolateral membrane. The MCT transporters are reported to be present in the human and animal intestine, with the MCT1 isoform being most investigated (Gill et al. 2005 ; Saksena et al. 2009 ). Likewise, Caco‐2 cells also express MCT1, with the transport of substrates, e.g., p ‐coumaric acid and gallic acid, being dependent on a proton gradient (transport increases with decreasing apical pH) and in a vectoral manner, i.e., preferentially moving from the apical to the basolateral compartment. Notably, most studies suggest that the location of the transporter is on the apical membrane (Alrefai et al. 2004 ; Buyse et al. 2002 ; Hadjiagapiou et al. 2000 ; Kimura, Haraguchi, et al. 2014 ; Kimura, Tsukagoshi, et al. 2009 ; Konishi et al. 2003 ; Tsuji et al. 1994 ; Tsukagoshi et al. 2014 ) not the basolateral membrane (Iwanaga et al. 2006 ). Since this is contrary to the proposed mechanism by Lakeram et al., we investigated the vectoral transport of the prototypical MCT1 substrate, p ‐coumaric acid, as well as propylparaben and its branched chain form, isopropylparaben, using Caco‐2 cells cultured on standard and Transwell plates.


## Materials and Methods
2 Materials and Methods 2.1 Materials Test chemicals were between 98% and 100% pure and were from Sigma‐Aldrich (Taufkirchen, Germany), except for 2‐ethylhexylparaben, which was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Heidelberg, Germany. All other chemicals and solutions used were from Sigma–Aldrich. 2.2 Caco‐2 Culture and Transwell Monolayer Preparation Caco‐2 cells were maintained at 37°C, 5% CO 2 and 95% humidity. The medium was replaced three times per week, and the monolayer was sub‐cultured in a ratio in the range of 1:5–1:15 when the culture reached a confluence of 80%. For Caco‐2 permeability assays, cells of at least 40 passages were seeded at 1.5 × 10 4 cells/well on permeable membrane inserts with a growth surface of 1.1 cm 2 (Transwell plates from Corning, Wiesbaden, Germany). The cells were cultured for 21 days, and the medium was renewed three times per week. The cell monolayer was monitored once a week by testing its integrity according to trans‐epithelial electrical resistance (TEER) with a Millicell‐ERS (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The permeability assays were performed on the 21st day if the TEER reached at least a value > 400 Ω/1.1 cm 2 growth surface. These were all greater than the 400 Ω/cm 2 threshold required, indicating good integrity of the monolayers at the time of the assays. 2.3 Caco‐2 Permeability Assay The apical buffer, pH 6.5, was HBSS supplemented with 0.5 mM MgCl 2 , 1.25 mM CaCl 2 , 20 mM MES (2‐(N‐morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid) buffer pH 6.5, and 25 mM glucose. The basolateral buffer, pH 7.4, was the same as the apical buffer with the exception of MES buffer being replaced by 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4. Test compounds were incubated at a final concentration of 5 μM (final concentration of the solvent, DMSO, was 0.5%). Atenolol (reference compound for low permeability) and erythromycin (reference compound for confirming transporter efflux) were prepared as 5 mM stock solutions in acetonitrile and further diluted to 50 μM in apical or basolateral buffer. The reference for high permeability, testosterone, was dissolved 10 mM in acetonitrile and was further diluted to 100 μM in apical or basolateral buffer. The solvent concentration for the reference items in the assay was 1% acetonitrile. Prior to assay start, the cells were washed twice with HBSS, and then the monolayer was equilibrated in pre‐warmed apical and basolateral buffer for 20 min at 37°C. The assay was started by replacing the apical or basolateral buffer with the test or reference compound starting solutions, according to the permeation direction. The Transwell plates were incubated at 37°C at 20 rpm in a shaking water bath. After 60 min, samples of 200 μL were taken from the basolateral and apical sides and transferred to a 96‐well polypropylene plate. All samples were precipitated with an equal volume of 50:50 (v/v) acetonitrile: methanol containing internal standards (ISTD, 1 μM of diazepam, diclofenac and griseofulvin). After mixing and centrifugation at room temperature (2200 xg, for 5 min), the particle‐free supernatants were transferred to 96‐well polypropylene plates and analyzed by LC‐HRMS analysis. Samples containing reference chemicals were mixed with the 0.5‐fold volume of acetonitrile containing the ISTD and were further processed as described above. If not analyzed immediately, samples were stored frozen at −20°C until LC‐HRMS measurement. 2.4 Measurement of Parent and 4‐HBA in Cell Lysates To test compound and 4‐HBA related to the cell monolayer, after the incubation and sample collection was completed, the remaining buffers were removed and the monolayer was quickly washed once with HBSS. The cell monolayer was lysed using 2 × 150 μL acetonitrile/ISTD (a total of 300 μL). For sample preparation, 100 μL of the lysate was added to 50 μL apical: basolateral buffer (50:50, v/v). After centrifugation (5 min at 2210 xg), 120–130 μL of supernatant was transferred to an LC–MS plate for measurement. 2.5 Measurement of Non‐Specific Binding of Parent Parabens For estimation of binding of the paraben and 4‐HBA to plastic materials during the experiment, each paraben was added to either the apical or basolateral compartment of the Transwells without cells and incubated in the same way as described for the permeability assay. The non‐specific binding of p ‐coumaric acid was not measured since the mass balance (recovery) was 89% and 116% in the A‐B and B‐A directions, respectively. 2.6 Follow‐Up Caco‐2 Investigations 2.6.1 Effect of Apical pH on A‐B and B‐A Kinetics in Transwells The Caco‐2 A‐B and B‐A assay was conducted with propylparaben (1, 5, 25, 50, and 100 μM), isopropylparaben (5 μM) and p ‐coumaric acid (1 mM) as described above but using two different pH gradients. The concentration of p ‐coumaric acid was selected based on the study by Konishi et al. ( 2003 ), who showed that 1 mM was (a) within the linear part of the permeability versus concentration curve and (b) suitable to demonstrate an effect of changes in the proton gradient. The first was with pH 6.5 in the apical and pH 7.4 in the basolateral compartments (as conduced in the main studies) and the second was pH 7.4 in apical and basolateral compartments (which prevents a proton gradient and thus inhibits the MCT transporter). 2.6.2 pH‐Dependent Uptake Into Monolayers Caco‐2 cells were seeded at 26,000 cells/well in standard 24‐well plates and cultured as described above for Transwell plates incubations. Eight days after seeding, the medium was removed, and the cells were washed with apical buffer adjusted to pH 5.5, pH 6.5, pH 7.4, or pH 8. Propylparaben (5 μM), isopropylparaben (5 μM) and p ‐coumaric acid (1 mM) were added to the wells in 0.5 mL apical buffer (with different pHs) and incubations were terminated after 0, 10, 30, and 60 min (triplicate wells per time point). At each time point, 200 μL of the medium was removed from the well, which was then precipitated with two volumes of acetonitrile containing the ISTD. The remainder of the medium was completely removed from each well, and the cells were lysed with 300 μL acetonitrile containing the ISTD and 150 μL of the respective apical buffer. All samples were analyzed undiluted (lysates 0 min) or diluted (lysates 10–60 min diluted by 5, supernatants + dosing solution diluted by 20). 2.7 Passive Permeability: Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeation Assay (PAMPA) A modified procedure of the Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeation Assay (PAMPA) described by Kansy et al. ( 1998 ) was used to provide an assessment of passive permeability. This was also used by others to compare passive diffusion with Papp in the Caco‐2 assay (Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2007 ). Test chemicals were prepared in PBS, pH 7.4 to a final concentration of 5 μM (in 5% DMSO). Reference compounds were included for low permeation (ceftriaxone, flux < 20%), medium permeation (guanabenz, flux 20%—70%) and high permeation (carbamazepine, flux > 70%). Stock solutions of the reference chemicals were prepared in ethanol (guanabenz and carbamazepine) or 50:50 ethanol: water and diluted in PBS to a final concentration of 250 μM in 5% DMSO. The assay used a Multiscreen 96‐well tray (donor) covered by a 96‐well Multiscreen Immobilon (acceptor) plate. The hydrophobic filter material of the Immobilon plate was pre‐wetted with 70% ethanol and treated with a solution of lipids (2% w/v lecithine consisting of 59% phosphatidylcholine and ≥ 7.9% phosphatidylethanolamine, dissolved in dodecane). The donor plate was filled with 150 μL test and reference chemicals, and the donor and acceptor plates were inserted into each other and placed onto an orbital shaker for 15 min at 100 rpm. The transport study was initiated by applying 150 μL PBS‐buffer to the acceptor plate. After 15–16 h incubation at room temperature, the contents of the acceptor and donor plate were collected and quantified using HPLC‐HRMS (QOrbitrap). Recovery samples to determine whether the chemicals exhibited non‐specific binding were prepared and incubated in representative vials during the permeation period under the same conditions. For HPLC‐HRMS analysis of the test chemicals, 120 μL of the incubate was removed from the acceptor and donor compartments. After the PAMPA assay was complete, the integrity of each membrane used in the assay was checked using lucifer yellow (Easton et al. 1997 ). In the integrity test, 100 μM lucifer yellow solution was added to the 96‐well Multiscreen Immobilon plate. The permeation of lucifer yellow was measured after 3–4 h into the wells of a new acceptor plate filled with water by measuring fluorescence (using a Wallac Victor3 1420 Multilabel Counter fluorimeter). As a control for non‐specific binding of the test chemicals to the filter material of the plate, parallel plates without addition of the lipid solution on the Immobilon plate were tested. Analysis of the test and reference chemicals was by HPLC‐HRMS. 2.8 Parent and Metabolite The concentration of each paraben and 4‐HBA was quantified by HPLC‐HRMS (Q‐Orbitrap), using a standard curve of the corresponding paraben and 4‐HBA. The analytes were separated on a Kinetex Phenyl‐Hexyl (2.6u, 50 × 2.1 mm) column using a gradient of mobile phase A (100% acetonitrile) and mobile phase B (10 mM ammonium acetate in water) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. The gradient was: 0 min = 5% A; 0.1 min = 5% A; 0.8 min = 97% A; 2.2 min = 97% A; 3.0 min = 5% A. 2.9 Data Analysis The apparent permeability in Caco‐2 cells in the A‐B (P appA‐B ) and B‐A (P appB‐A ) directions was calculated using Equations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ), respectively. These values were calculated using a value of Q as the amount in parent chemical only in the receiver compartment or the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed in the receiver compartment. (1) Papp A − B cm / s = Q Basolateral t × V Baso l ateral / A × C 0 Apical Where Q Basolateral is the concentration of parent paraben ± 4‐HBA in the basolateral compartment at the end of the incubation in pmoles/ml, t is the incubation time in seconds, V Basolateral is the volume of the basolateral compartment in ml, A is the surface area of the Caco‐2 monolayer in cm 2 and C 0,Apical is the initial concentration of the paraben added to the apical compartment (pmoles/ml). (2) Papp B − A cm / s = Q Apical dt × V Apical / A × C 0 Basolateral Where Q Apical is the concentration of parent paraben ± 4‐HBA in the apical compartment at the end of the incubation in ng/ml, dt is the incubation time in seconds, V Apical is the volume of the apical compartment in ml, A is the surface area of the Caco‐2 monolayer in cm 2 and C 0,Basolateral is the initial concentration of the paraben added to the basolateral compartment (pmoles/ml). Mass balance (MB) (i.e., the total recovery) for both A‐B and B‐A incubations in the Caco‐2 assays was calculated according to Equations ( 3 ) and ( 4 ), respectively. This was according to the total amount in pmoles of parent paraben ± 4‐HBA detected in the apical and basolateral compartments after a 60 min incubation, expressed as a percentage of the initial amount in pmoles applied to the donor compartment (t0). (3) MB Apical = Q parent ± 4 − HBA , Apical , t 60 min + Q Parent ± 4 − HBA , Basolateral , t 60 min Qparent , Apical , t 0 × 100 (4) MB Basolateral = Q parent ± 4 − HBA , Apical , t 60 min + Q parent ± 4 − HBA , Basolateral , t 60 min Qparent , Basolateral , t 0 × 100 ^ The apparent permeability of parabens in the PAMPA (Papp PAMPA ) incubations was calculated using Equation ( 5 ). (5) Papp PAMPA = C × − ln 1 − C acceptor C donor where C = V D × V A V D + V A × area × time Where D is the donor compartment, A is the acceptor compartment, V is the volume of the donor and acceptor compartments (0.15 mL), time is 57,600 s, and the area of the lipid membrane is 0.28 cm 2 . The two‐tailed paired t‐test in Prism GraphPad version 6.07, 2015, was used to determine statistical differences, where p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. For correlation analysis using linear regression, outliers were detected within Prism GraphPad using a ROUT coefficient Q of 10%. The ROUT method parameters were: a fitting method with least squares regression, medium strict convergence criteria, and a maximum number of 1000 iterations. There was no weighting, and each replicate y value was used as an individual point.


## Materials
2.1 Materials Test chemicals were between 98% and 100% pure and were from Sigma‐Aldrich (Taufkirchen, Germany), except for 2‐ethylhexylparaben, which was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Heidelberg, Germany. All other chemicals and solutions used were from Sigma–Aldrich.


## Caco‐2 Culture and Transwell Monolayer Preparation
2.2 Caco‐2 Culture and Transwell Monolayer Preparation Caco‐2 cells were maintained at 37°C, 5% CO 2 and 95% humidity. The medium was replaced three times per week, and the monolayer was sub‐cultured in a ratio in the range of 1:5–1:15 when the culture reached a confluence of 80%. For Caco‐2 permeability assays, cells of at least 40 passages were seeded at 1.5 × 10 4 cells/well on permeable membrane inserts with a growth surface of 1.1 cm 2 (Transwell plates from Corning, Wiesbaden, Germany). The cells were cultured for 21 days, and the medium was renewed three times per week. The cell monolayer was monitored once a week by testing its integrity according to trans‐epithelial electrical resistance (TEER) with a Millicell‐ERS (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The permeability assays were performed on the 21st day if the TEER reached at least a value > 400 Ω/1.1 cm 2 growth surface. These were all greater than the 400 Ω/cm 2 threshold required, indicating good integrity of the monolayers at the time of the assays.


## Caco‐2 Permeability Assay
2.3 Caco‐2 Permeability Assay The apical buffer, pH 6.5, was HBSS supplemented with 0.5 mM MgCl 2 , 1.25 mM CaCl 2 , 20 mM MES (2‐(N‐morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid) buffer pH 6.5, and 25 mM glucose. The basolateral buffer, pH 7.4, was the same as the apical buffer with the exception of MES buffer being replaced by 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4. Test compounds were incubated at a final concentration of 5 μM (final concentration of the solvent, DMSO, was 0.5%). Atenolol (reference compound for low permeability) and erythromycin (reference compound for confirming transporter efflux) were prepared as 5 mM stock solutions in acetonitrile and further diluted to 50 μM in apical or basolateral buffer. The reference for high permeability, testosterone, was dissolved 10 mM in acetonitrile and was further diluted to 100 μM in apical or basolateral buffer. The solvent concentration for the reference items in the assay was 1% acetonitrile. Prior to assay start, the cells were washed twice with HBSS, and then the monolayer was equilibrated in pre‐warmed apical and basolateral buffer for 20 min at 37°C. The assay was started by replacing the apical or basolateral buffer with the test or reference compound starting solutions, according to the permeation direction. The Transwell plates were incubated at 37°C at 20 rpm in a shaking water bath. After 60 min, samples of 200 μL were taken from the basolateral and apical sides and transferred to a 96‐well polypropylene plate. All samples were precipitated with an equal volume of 50:50 (v/v) acetonitrile: methanol containing internal standards (ISTD, 1 μM of diazepam, diclofenac and griseofulvin). After mixing and centrifugation at room temperature (2200 xg, for 5 min), the particle‐free supernatants were transferred to 96‐well polypropylene plates and analyzed by LC‐HRMS analysis. Samples containing reference chemicals were mixed with the 0.5‐fold volume of acetonitrile containing the ISTD and were further processed as described above. If not analyzed immediately, samples were stored frozen at −20°C until LC‐HRMS measurement.


## Measurement of Parent and 4‐HBA in Cell Lysates
2.4 Measurement of Parent and 4‐HBA in Cell Lysates To test compound and 4‐HBA related to the cell monolayer, after the incubation and sample collection was completed, the remaining buffers were removed and the monolayer was quickly washed once with HBSS. The cell monolayer was lysed using 2 × 150 μL acetonitrile/ISTD (a total of 300 μL). For sample preparation, 100 μL of the lysate was added to 50 μL apical: basolateral buffer (50:50, v/v). After centrifugation (5 min at 2210 xg), 120–130 μL of supernatant was transferred to an LC–MS plate for measurement.


## Measurement of Non‐Specific Binding of Parent Parabens
2.5 Measurement of Non‐Specific Binding of Parent Parabens For estimation of binding of the paraben and 4‐HBA to plastic materials during the experiment, each paraben was added to either the apical or basolateral compartment of the Transwells without cells and incubated in the same way as described for the permeability assay. The non‐specific binding of p ‐coumaric acid was not measured since the mass balance (recovery) was 89% and 116% in the A‐B and B‐A directions, respectively.


## Follow‐Up Caco‐2 Investigations
2.6 Follow‐Up Caco‐2 Investigations 2.6.1 Effect of Apical pH on A‐B and B‐A Kinetics in Transwells The Caco‐2 A‐B and B‐A assay was conducted with propylparaben (1, 5, 25, 50, and 100 μM), isopropylparaben (5 μM) and p ‐coumaric acid (1 mM) as described above but using two different pH gradients. The concentration of p ‐coumaric acid was selected based on the study by Konishi et al. ( 2003 ), who showed that 1 mM was (a) within the linear part of the permeability versus concentration curve and (b) suitable to demonstrate an effect of changes in the proton gradient. The first was with pH 6.5 in the apical and pH 7.4 in the basolateral compartments (as conduced in the main studies) and the second was pH 7.4 in apical and basolateral compartments (which prevents a proton gradient and thus inhibits the MCT transporter). 2.6.2 pH‐Dependent Uptake Into Monolayers Caco‐2 cells were seeded at 26,000 cells/well in standard 24‐well plates and cultured as described above for Transwell plates incubations. Eight days after seeding, the medium was removed, and the cells were washed with apical buffer adjusted to pH 5.5, pH 6.5, pH 7.4, or pH 8. Propylparaben (5 μM), isopropylparaben (5 μM) and p ‐coumaric acid (1 mM) were added to the wells in 0.5 mL apical buffer (with different pHs) and incubations were terminated after 0, 10, 30, and 60 min (triplicate wells per time point). At each time point, 200 μL of the medium was removed from the well, which was then precipitated with two volumes of acetonitrile containing the ISTD. The remainder of the medium was completely removed from each well, and the cells were lysed with 300 μL acetonitrile containing the ISTD and 150 μL of the respective apical buffer. All samples were analyzed undiluted (lysates 0 min) or diluted (lysates 10–60 min diluted by 5, supernatants + dosing solution diluted by 20).


## Effect of Apical pH on A‐B and B‐A Kinetics in Transwells
2.6.1 Effect of Apical pH on A‐B and B‐A Kinetics in Transwells The Caco‐2 A‐B and B‐A assay was conducted with propylparaben (1, 5, 25, 50, and 100 μM), isopropylparaben (5 μM) and p ‐coumaric acid (1 mM) as described above but using two different pH gradients. The concentration of p ‐coumaric acid was selected based on the study by Konishi et al. ( 2003 ), who showed that 1 mM was (a) within the linear part of the permeability versus concentration curve and (b) suitable to demonstrate an effect of changes in the proton gradient. The first was with pH 6.5 in the apical and pH 7.4 in the basolateral compartments (as conduced in the main studies) and the second was pH 7.4 in apical and basolateral compartments (which prevents a proton gradient and thus inhibits the MCT transporter).


## pH‐Dependent Uptake Into Monolayers
2.6.2 pH‐Dependent Uptake Into Monolayers Caco‐2 cells were seeded at 26,000 cells/well in standard 24‐well plates and cultured as described above for Transwell plates incubations. Eight days after seeding, the medium was removed, and the cells were washed with apical buffer adjusted to pH 5.5, pH 6.5, pH 7.4, or pH 8. Propylparaben (5 μM), isopropylparaben (5 μM) and p ‐coumaric acid (1 mM) were added to the wells in 0.5 mL apical buffer (with different pHs) and incubations were terminated after 0, 10, 30, and 60 min (triplicate wells per time point). At each time point, 200 μL of the medium was removed from the well, which was then precipitated with two volumes of acetonitrile containing the ISTD. The remainder of the medium was completely removed from each well, and the cells were lysed with 300 μL acetonitrile containing the ISTD and 150 μL of the respective apical buffer. All samples were analyzed undiluted (lysates 0 min) or diluted (lysates 10–60 min diluted by 5, supernatants + dosing solution diluted by 20).


## Passive Permeability: Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeation Assay (PAMPA)
2.7 Passive Permeability: Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeation Assay (PAMPA) A modified procedure of the Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeation Assay (PAMPA) described by Kansy et al. ( 1998 ) was used to provide an assessment of passive permeability. This was also used by others to compare passive diffusion with Papp in the Caco‐2 assay (Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2007 ). Test chemicals were prepared in PBS, pH 7.4 to a final concentration of 5 μM (in 5% DMSO). Reference compounds were included for low permeation (ceftriaxone, flux < 20%), medium permeation (guanabenz, flux 20%—70%) and high permeation (carbamazepine, flux > 70%). Stock solutions of the reference chemicals were prepared in ethanol (guanabenz and carbamazepine) or 50:50 ethanol: water and diluted in PBS to a final concentration of 250 μM in 5% DMSO. The assay used a Multiscreen 96‐well tray (donor) covered by a 96‐well Multiscreen Immobilon (acceptor) plate. The hydrophobic filter material of the Immobilon plate was pre‐wetted with 70% ethanol and treated with a solution of lipids (2% w/v lecithine consisting of 59% phosphatidylcholine and ≥ 7.9% phosphatidylethanolamine, dissolved in dodecane). The donor plate was filled with 150 μL test and reference chemicals, and the donor and acceptor plates were inserted into each other and placed onto an orbital shaker for 15 min at 100 rpm. The transport study was initiated by applying 150 μL PBS‐buffer to the acceptor plate. After 15–16 h incubation at room temperature, the contents of the acceptor and donor plate were collected and quantified using HPLC‐HRMS (QOrbitrap). Recovery samples to determine whether the chemicals exhibited non‐specific binding were prepared and incubated in representative vials during the permeation period under the same conditions. For HPLC‐HRMS analysis of the test chemicals, 120 μL of the incubate was removed from the acceptor and donor compartments. After the PAMPA assay was complete, the integrity of each membrane used in the assay was checked using lucifer yellow (Easton et al. 1997 ). In the integrity test, 100 μM lucifer yellow solution was added to the 96‐well Multiscreen Immobilon plate. The permeation of lucifer yellow was measured after 3–4 h into the wells of a new acceptor plate filled with water by measuring fluorescence (using a Wallac Victor3 1420 Multilabel Counter fluorimeter). As a control for non‐specific binding of the test chemicals to the filter material of the plate, parallel plates without addition of the lipid solution on the Immobilon plate were tested. Analysis of the test and reference chemicals was by HPLC‐HRMS.


## Parent and Metabolite
2.8 Parent and Metabolite The concentration of each paraben and 4‐HBA was quantified by HPLC‐HRMS (Q‐Orbitrap), using a standard curve of the corresponding paraben and 4‐HBA. The analytes were separated on a Kinetex Phenyl‐Hexyl (2.6u, 50 × 2.1 mm) column using a gradient of mobile phase A (100% acetonitrile) and mobile phase B (10 mM ammonium acetate in water) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. The gradient was: 0 min = 5% A; 0.1 min = 5% A; 0.8 min = 97% A; 2.2 min = 97% A; 3.0 min = 5% A.


## Data Analysis
2.9 Data Analysis The apparent permeability in Caco‐2 cells in the A‐B (P appA‐B ) and B‐A (P appB‐A ) directions was calculated using Equations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ), respectively. These values were calculated using a value of Q as the amount in parent chemical only in the receiver compartment or the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed in the receiver compartment. (1) Papp A − B cm / s = Q Basolateral t × V Baso l ateral / A × C 0 Apical Where Q Basolateral is the concentration of parent paraben ± 4‐HBA in the basolateral compartment at the end of the incubation in pmoles/ml, t is the incubation time in seconds, V Basolateral is the volume of the basolateral compartment in ml, A is the surface area of the Caco‐2 monolayer in cm 2 and C 0,Apical is the initial concentration of the paraben added to the apical compartment (pmoles/ml). (2) Papp B − A cm / s = Q Apical dt × V Apical / A × C 0 Basolateral Where Q Apical is the concentration of parent paraben ± 4‐HBA in the apical compartment at the end of the incubation in ng/ml, dt is the incubation time in seconds, V Apical is the volume of the apical compartment in ml, A is the surface area of the Caco‐2 monolayer in cm 2 and C 0,Basolateral is the initial concentration of the paraben added to the basolateral compartment (pmoles/ml). Mass balance (MB) (i.e., the total recovery) for both A‐B and B‐A incubations in the Caco‐2 assays was calculated according to Equations ( 3 ) and ( 4 ), respectively. This was according to the total amount in pmoles of parent paraben ± 4‐HBA detected in the apical and basolateral compartments after a 60 min incubation, expressed as a percentage of the initial amount in pmoles applied to the donor compartment (t0). (3) MB Apical = Q parent ± 4 − HBA , Apical , t 60 min + Q Parent ± 4 − HBA , Basolateral , t 60 min Qparent , Apical , t 0 × 100 (4) MB Basolateral = Q parent ± 4 − HBA , Apical , t 60 min + Q parent ± 4 − HBA , Basolateral , t 60 min Qparent , Basolateral , t 0 × 100 ^ The apparent permeability of parabens in the PAMPA (Papp PAMPA ) incubations was calculated using Equation ( 5 ). (5) Papp PAMPA = C × − ln 1 − C acceptor C donor where C = V D × V A V D + V A × area × time Where D is the donor compartment, A is the acceptor compartment, V is the volume of the donor and acceptor compartments (0.15 mL), time is 57,600 s, and the area of the lipid membrane is 0.28 cm 2 . The two‐tailed paired t‐test in Prism GraphPad version 6.07, 2015, was used to determine statistical differences, where p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. For correlation analysis using linear regression, outliers were detected within Prism GraphPad using a ROUT coefficient Q of 10%. The ROUT method parameters were: a fitting method with least squares regression, medium strict convergence criteria, and a maximum number of 1000 iterations. There was no weighting, and each replicate y value was used as an individual point.


## Results
3 Results 3.1 P app A‐B and P app B‐A Values 3.1.1 Straight‐Chain Parabens The P app A‐B and P app B‐A values were calculated using the amount of parent paraben only in the receiver compartment or using the total amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed during the incubation (shown in Table S2 , along with values for reference compounds incubated at the same time). Compounds with a P app A‐B of 10 × 10 −6 cm/s were considered to be highly permeable (the reference for this was testosterone); whereas low permeability compounds were classified as those with P app A‐B values of < 1 × 10 −6 cm/s (the reference for this was atenolol). The P app B‐A:A‐B ratio was 31.5 for the reference control, erythromycin, which confirmed the presence of MDR1‐mediated efflux in the Caco‐2 monolayers used in these incubations. P app A‐B values using the measurement of parent paraben only indicated that all straight‐chain parabens exhibited low permeability compared to testosterone (Supplementary Table S2 ). However, when the amount of 4‐HBA formed and present in the receiver compartment was included in the calculation of P app A‐B, five of the straight‐chain parabens were reclassified as highly permeable. Since these values better reflected known in vivo permeability (Shin et al. 2019 ) and have been recommended as a better indication of P app for the parabens (Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2007 ), all further comparisons were made using P app A‐B values calculated using a total of parent paraben plus 4‐HBA formed and present in the receiver compartment. Figure 2 shows the correlation between the LogP and P app values in Caco‐2 cells (P app A‐B and P app B‐A ) and in the PAMPA (P app PAMPA ) for all straight‐chain parabens. P app A‐B values for parabens with chain lengths of C1 to C5 were higher (2.9‐ to 3.7‐fold—see Supplementary Table S2 ) than that of testosterone (10.92 ± 2.49 × 10 −6 cm/s). The P app A‐B decreased with increasing chain length and hence LogP; whereby, parabens with a chain length of longer than C4 (LogP > 3.6) were classified as moderate to low permeability. The P app B‐A values also decreased with increasing LogP; however, P app B‐A values for several parabens (C1–C5) were statistically significantly lower than their corresponding P app A‐B values ( p < 0.05), suggesting preferential vectoral permeability in the A‐B direction. This was also true for 4‐HBA (for which the LogP is 1.56); although the difference did not reach statistical significance (P app A‐B was 5.90 ± 3.12 × 10 −6 cm/s and P app B‐A was 1.70 ± 0.27 × 10 −6 cm/s). The permeability measured in the PAMPA (P app PAMPA ) were similar to the P app B‐A values for all straight‐chain parabens. FIGURE 2 Correlation of P app A‐B (open circles) and P app B‐A (black circles) permeability in Caco‐2 cells and PAMPA permeability (gray circles) of straight‐chain parabens with their LogP. P app values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment and are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. LogP values were from the EPA Dashboard and are listed in Supplementary Table S1 . Values of P app A‐B , which were statistically significantly higher than P app B‐A ( p < 0.05) are denoted with an asterisk. 3.1.2 Branched‐Chain Parabens The permeability of propylparaben was different from its branched chain isoform, isopropylparaben (Figure 3 ). There was a statistically significant ( p < 0.05) difference in the P app B‐A to P app A‐B ratio for the straight‐chain but not the branched‐chain isoform, suggesting that the conformational change in structure altered the transport of this paraben (since their molecular weights are the same and LogP values are similar: ~ 3). FIGURE 3 Comparison of the P app A‐B (white bars), P app B‐A (black bars) and P app PAMPA (gray bars) permeabilities of straight‐chain with corresponding branched‐chain parabens. P app A‐B , and P app B‐A values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment. Values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. Values of P app A‐B , which were statistically significantly higher than P app B‐A ( p < 0.05) are denoted with an asterisk. The P app values for the three different branched‐chain forms of butylparaben were similar in terms of their magnitude and the tendency to exhibit vectoral A‐B permeability, although the latter was only statistically significant for isobutyl‐ and sec ‐butylparaben (Figure 3 ). Changing the methyl group to a phenyl group did not alter the P app A‐B or P app B‐A values, despite increasing the LogP from 1.87 to 3.21. Addition of a benzyl group also increased the LogP (to 3.56) but in this case, the P app A‐B value was decreased. The addition of the large branched‐chain alkyl group (to 2‐ethylhexylparaben) resulted in a low permeability of this paraben, which also exhibited a higher LogP of 5.36. As observed with straight‐chain parabens, P app B‐A tended to be lower than P app A‐B values, with statistically significant lower values ( p < 0.05) for all except isopropyl‐ and tert ‐butylparaben. 3.2 Factors Affecting Mass Balance (MB) Figure 4A shows the MB (i.e., the % of the starting amount recovered from the apical and basolateral compartments) of parent paraben at the end of the 1 h incubation with Caco‐2 cells. The MB for all parent parabens was notably lower in A‐B than in B‐A incubations. For example, for the C1–C5 straight‐chain parabens, the MB values ranged between 27% and 35% in A‐B incubations, while they were 81% to 89% in B‐A incubations. With the exception of 2‐ethylhexylparaben, the MB in A‐B incubations with branched‐chain parabens varied between 24% and 74%, while their MB in B‐A incubations were all above 81% (range 81% to 97%). FIGURE 4 Mass balance of parabens in A‐B incubations (white bars) and B‐A incubations (black bars) in the Caco‐2 assay (a) incubations with Caco‐2 cells and (b) empty Transwells. Mass balance was according to quantification of parent chemical only in the apical and basolateral compartments. In the same incubations, the total amount of 4‐HBA recovered from the apical and basolateral compartment plus the lysate (c) and amount of parent detected in the cell lysates (d) are shown. All values are expressed as a percentage of the applied dose and are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. All parabens tested were chemically stable under the conditions of the assay without cells (data not shown). The cause of the loss of MB was investigated by measuring (a) non‐specific binding (NSB) to empty Transwells (Figure 4B ), (b) ester hydrolysis of the paraben to 4‐HBA (Figure 4C ) and (c) accumulation of parent in cells (Figure 4D ). There was minimal NSB to the Transwells of the straight‐chain parabens with chain lengths of C1–C4 in both A‐B and B‐A incubations (the MB ranged between 89% and 101%). By contrast, longer straight‐chain parabens from C5 to C9 bound the Transwells, with increasing NSB as the chain length increased (Figure 4B ). This accounted for the majority of the loss of recovery observed in the Caco‐2 cell incubations for these parabens. Notably, the longest straight‐chain paraben, dodecylparaben, exhibited only a small degree of NSB (MB was 85% and 89% in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively), which was also reflected in the MB of this paraben in incubations with Caco‐2 cells (MB was 81% and 87% in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively (Figure 4A )). Of the branched‐chain parabens, only phenylparaben and 2‐ethylhexylparaben exhibited extensive NSB to the Transwells. The extent of binding of phenylparaben was higher in the A‐B than in the B‐A incubations (MB was 38% and 71% in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively); whereas NSB of 2‐ethylhexylparaben was extensive in both directions (the MB was 13% and 25% for A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively). The MB reported in Figure 4A is a measure of the amount of parent chemical recovered; however, some of this was metabolized by the Caco‐2 cells to 4‐HBA. Figure 4C shows the % of the initial amount of paraben which was hydrolyzed to 4‐HBA and detected in the apical and basolateral compartments, plus the lysate (which was assumed to reflect the intracellular amount). The hydrolysis to 4‐HBA in A‐B incubations accounted for up to 60% of the loss of the MB of the straight‐chain parabens. Likewise, the loss of MB for phenylparaben in cell incubations could also be attributed to metabolism, since 57% (A‐B) and 11% (B‐A) of this paraben was hydrolyzed during the 1 h incubation. The MB shown in Figure 4A reflects the amount recovered in the apical and basolateral compartments but does not take into account the amount accumulated in the cells. The distribution of the parent parabens in the cell lysates and apical and basolateral compartments after apical or basolateral application of the parent paraben is shown in Figure S1 . While less than 5% of the initial amount of C1‐C5 straight‐chain parabens accumulated in the cells (Figure 4C ), up to 32% of the initial concentration of C7–C12 straight‐chain parabens accumulated, the extent of which was higher in B‐A than A‐B incubations (26%–32% in A‐B incubations and 4%–7% in B‐A incubations). Several of the branched‐chain parabens also accumulated to some extent in the cells, most notably 2‐ethylhexylparaben (17% and 46% of the starting concentration was detected in the lysate in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively). 3.3 Metabolism to 4‐HBA and Distribution Across Compartments Comparisons of the LogP with the % of parent straight‐chain paraben hydrolyzed to 4‐HBA, detected in the lysate and apical and basolateral compartments, in A‐B and B‐A incubations are shown in Figure 5A . For all parabens, there was more 4‐HBA formed in A‐B than B‐A incubations. Moreover, for A‐B incubations, there was an inverse relationship between the % hydrolyzed and the LogP of the straight‐chain parabens, ranging between 1.87 and 7.4. The highest extent of hydrolysis was observed for methylparaben (67% hydrolyzed) and the lowest extent was observed for dodecylparaben (0.8% hydrolyzed). By contrast, there was no link between the LogP and the % hydrolyzed when the same parabens were incubated in the B‐A direction (Figure 4A ). The LogP values of the branch‐chain parabens were also not linked to the % hydrolyzed in either direction (data not shown), although the LogP only ranged between 2.9 and 5.4. FIGURE 5 Comparison of the (a) LogP with the % hydrolysis of straight‐chain parabens in A‐B (open circles) and B‐A (black circles) incubations and (b) permeability calculated as the P app A‐B minus P app PAMPA with the % hydrolysis of straight‐chain parabens (open circles) and branched‐chain (open triangles) in A‐B incubations. P app values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. Interestingly, there was a good correlation between the extent of hydrolysis and the P app A‐B for straight‐chain parabens ( R 2 = 0.93). This correlation was increased ( R 2 = 0.98) when the values for passive diffusion (P app PAMPA ) were subtracted from the P app A‐B value (Figure 5B ). Of the branched‐chain parabens, only phenylparaben fitted into the same correlation (Figure 5B ). The extent of hydroxylation of the remaining five parabens was lower than would be predicted based on their permeability. Figure 6 shows the distribution of 4‐HBA in the cell lysates and apical and basolateral compartments after apical or basolateral application of the parent paraben. In general, once formed from the hydrolysis of the parent chemical, up to 22% of 4‐HBA remained in the cells. For most parabens, the direction of movement of 4‐HBA appeared to be preferentially from the apical to basolateral compartment, since the amount detected in the basolateral side was higher than that detected in the apical compartment. The exceptions to this were the longer straight‐chain parabens (> C4) and tert ‐butylparaben. After apical application of pentylparaben, 4‐HBA formed from its hydrolysis was evenly distributed in the apical and basolateral compartment. Relatively more 4‐HBA formed from heptyl‐ to nonylparaben appeared in the apical compartment and, in the case of dodecylparaben and tert ‐butylparaben, 4‐HBA was not detected in the basolateral compartment at all. After basolateral application of sec ‐butylparaben, 4‐HBA was also only detected in the lysate and apical compartments. FIGURE 6 Distribution of 4‐HBA in (a) A‐B and (b) B‐A Caco‐2 incubations with straight‐chain and branched‐chain parabens. The amount of 4‐HBA in the apical compartment (white bars), lysate (black bars) and basolateral compartment (gray bars) is expressed as a mean (+SD of n = 3 wells) of the total amount recovered. 3.4 Investigations Into Transporter‐Mediated Uptake and/or Efflux 3.4.1 Papp and Uptake of p ‐Coumaric Acid The presence of the MCT1 transporter on the apical membrane of the Caco‐2 cells used in these experiments was confirmed using p ‐coumaric acid. Firstly, the permeability of this MCT1 substrate across Caco‐2 cells in Transwells with an apical pH of 6.5 (and basolateral pH of 7.4) was 2.7‐fold higher in the A‐B than the B‐A direction (Figure 7A ). This vectoral permeability was abolished by incubating the Caco‐2 cells with buffer at pH 7.4 in the apical and basolateral compartments, whereby permeability was by passive diffusion. Secondly, the uptake of p ‐coumaric acid into monolayers of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates (thus exposing only the apical membrane to chemical) increased with an increase in the proton gradient, i.e., when the pH of the apical compartment was decreased from pH 7.4 to pH 5.5 (Figure 7B ). Based on these findings, we classified a good MCT substrate to have (a) a P app A‐B to P app B‐A ratio greater than 2.0 (poor substrates have similar P app A‐B and P app B‐A values, i.e., a ratio of 1) and (b) increased uptake into the apical membrane of Caco‐2 cells with decreasing apical pH. An MCT1 inhibitor was not used in these studies since the concentrations shown to be effective in Caco‐2 cells (Kimura, Haraguchi, et al. 2014 ; Konishi et al. 2003 ) were in the millimolar range and thus were considered to have non‐specific effects. FIGURE 7 (a) Comparison of the P app A‐B and P app B‐A permeability of p ‐coumaric acid with the apical compartment set at pH 6.5 and 7.4 and (b) time‐ and pH‐dependent uptake of p ‐coumaric acid into monolayers of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates. Incubations were in buffer maintained at pH 7.4 (open circles), pH 6.5 (black triangles), pH 6.0 (black squares) and pH 5.5 (black circles). P app values were calculated according to the amount of p ‐coumaric acid in the receiver compartment. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. 3.4.2 P app and Uptake of Propylparaben and Isopropylparaben When propylparaben was evaluated according to the criteria above, it was not classified as a substrate for MCT1. The vectoral permeability (measured using parent chemical and 4‐HBA in the receiver compartment) was not abolished by changing the apical pH from 6.5 to 7.4 (Figure 8a ) and the uptake of parent chemical into cell monolayers (assessed by comparing the remaining parent in the medium) was not impacted by pH (Figure 8b ). While there was no effect of pH on the uptake of parent propylparaben, the concentration of 4‐HBA in the medium (which had been produced in the monolayers) increased with increasing apical pH from 6.5 to 7.4 (Figure 8c ), suggesting that this was a substrate for MCT1 (Figure 8d ). FIGURE 8 (a) P app A‐B (white or gray bars) and P app B‐A (black or gray hatched bars) permeability of propylparaben and isopropylparaben in Caco‐2 incubations with the apical compartment set at pH 6.5 and 7.4. Concentration of (b) propylparaben and (c) 4‐HBA over time in the medium of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates and maintained at pH 7.4 (open circles), pH 6.5 (black triangles), pH 6.0 (black squares) and pH 5.5 (black circles). All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. (d) Scheme showing proposed pathway: Passive uptake of propylparaben is pH‐independent but the formation of 4‐HBA decreases the intracellular pH and results in its increased efflux via the MCT1 transporter. In contrast to propylparaben, the permeability of isopropylparaben was the same in both directions and at both pHs (Figure 8a ) and the parent chemical was the major contributor to the overall permeability of this paraben. Unlike propylparaben, the efflux of 4‐HBA into the medium above the cells was unaffected by changes in pH (data not shown). 3.4.3 Contribution of Passive and Active Permeability The contribution of passive and active permeability of parent chemical and 4‐HBA in incubations with propylparaben and isopropylparaben was evaluated by measuring the amount of each in the receiver compartment of Transwells with two different apical pHs (Figure 9 ). The overall permeability of 5 μM propylparaben was indicated to be mainly driven by vectoral permeability of 4‐HBA, since the rate of transport of the parent chemical itself in the receiver compartments was the same in both A‐B and B‐A directions while the rate of transport of 4‐HBA formed was much higher and vectoral, i.e., preferentially in the A‐B direction (Figure 9a ). The rate of transport of the parent propylparaben to the receiver compartment was also not impacted by pH, although the rate of transport of 4‐HBA formed was moderately increased in the A‐B direction (from 832 ± 157 pmoles to 1343 ± 67 pmoles by 60 min) when the apical compartment was at 7.4 (Figure 9b ). The overall permeability of isopropylparaben was indicated to be mainly driven by passive diffusion of parent paraben itself since (a) the rate of transport of the parent was higher than 4‐HBA and (b) neither the parent chemical nor 4‐HBA amounts in the receiver compartments were impacted by pH or the A‐B or B‐A direction (Figure 9c,d ). FIGURE 9 Kinetics of the transport across Caco‐2 cells of parent propylparaben (black triangles) and 4‐HBA formed during the incubation (open circles) in A‐B (solid lines) and B‐A (dotted lines) incubations with different apical compartment pHs. The test chemicals, propylparaben (a and b) and isopropylparaben (c and d), together with 4‐HBA formed were measured in the receiver compartment of Transwells with the apical pH set at 6.5 (a and c) and 7.4 (b and d). Initial concentrations of test chemicals (parent parabens) were 5 μM. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. The relative contribution of active efflux of 4‐HBA formed from the hydrolysis of the parent chemical to the overall A‐B permeability of propylparaben decreased with increasing concentrations from 1 μM to 100 μM (Figure S2a ). The contribution of 4‐HBA was higher than the parent chemical at 1, 5, and 25 μM but lower at 100 μM, whereas the contribution of 4‐HBA and the parent were comparable at 50 μM. Therefore, the permeability in the A‐B direction was mainly attributable to the parent chemical at a high concentration of 100 μM but minor at low concentrations (1–25 μM). This relative contribution correlated with the P appA‐B :P appB‐A ratios, which were above two at concentrations of 1–25 μM but were lower at 50 μM (the ratio was 1.4 at both pHs tested) (Figure S2b ). At 100 μM the permeability was driven mainly by diffusion of the parent chemical, which was reflected in the P appA‐B :P appB‐A ratio (which was 1 at both pHs tested). The hydrolysis to 4‐HBA started to be saturated at concentrations greater than 25 μM in the A‐B direction and greater than 50 μM in the B‐A direction (Figure S2c ), which likely decreased the contribution of this transporter‐mediated pathway at higher concentrations.


## Papp A‐B and Papp B‐A Values
3.1 P app A‐B and P app B‐A Values 3.1.1 Straight‐Chain Parabens The P app A‐B and P app B‐A values were calculated using the amount of parent paraben only in the receiver compartment or using the total amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed during the incubation (shown in Table S2 , along with values for reference compounds incubated at the same time). Compounds with a P app A‐B of 10 × 10 −6 cm/s were considered to be highly permeable (the reference for this was testosterone); whereas low permeability compounds were classified as those with P app A‐B values of < 1 × 10 −6 cm/s (the reference for this was atenolol). The P app B‐A:A‐B ratio was 31.5 for the reference control, erythromycin, which confirmed the presence of MDR1‐mediated efflux in the Caco‐2 monolayers used in these incubations. P app A‐B values using the measurement of parent paraben only indicated that all straight‐chain parabens exhibited low permeability compared to testosterone (Supplementary Table S2 ). However, when the amount of 4‐HBA formed and present in the receiver compartment was included in the calculation of P app A‐B, five of the straight‐chain parabens were reclassified as highly permeable. Since these values better reflected known in vivo permeability (Shin et al. 2019 ) and have been recommended as a better indication of P app for the parabens (Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2007 ), all further comparisons were made using P app A‐B values calculated using a total of parent paraben plus 4‐HBA formed and present in the receiver compartment. Figure 2 shows the correlation between the LogP and P app values in Caco‐2 cells (P app A‐B and P app B‐A ) and in the PAMPA (P app PAMPA ) for all straight‐chain parabens. P app A‐B values for parabens with chain lengths of C1 to C5 were higher (2.9‐ to 3.7‐fold—see Supplementary Table S2 ) than that of testosterone (10.92 ± 2.49 × 10 −6 cm/s). The P app A‐B decreased with increasing chain length and hence LogP; whereby, parabens with a chain length of longer than C4 (LogP > 3.6) were classified as moderate to low permeability. The P app B‐A values also decreased with increasing LogP; however, P app B‐A values for several parabens (C1–C5) were statistically significantly lower than their corresponding P app A‐B values ( p < 0.05), suggesting preferential vectoral permeability in the A‐B direction. This was also true for 4‐HBA (for which the LogP is 1.56); although the difference did not reach statistical significance (P app A‐B was 5.90 ± 3.12 × 10 −6 cm/s and P app B‐A was 1.70 ± 0.27 × 10 −6 cm/s). The permeability measured in the PAMPA (P app PAMPA ) were similar to the P app B‐A values for all straight‐chain parabens. FIGURE 2 Correlation of P app A‐B (open circles) and P app B‐A (black circles) permeability in Caco‐2 cells and PAMPA permeability (gray circles) of straight‐chain parabens with their LogP. P app values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment and are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. LogP values were from the EPA Dashboard and are listed in Supplementary Table S1 . Values of P app A‐B , which were statistically significantly higher than P app B‐A ( p < 0.05) are denoted with an asterisk. 3.1.2 Branched‐Chain Parabens The permeability of propylparaben was different from its branched chain isoform, isopropylparaben (Figure 3 ). There was a statistically significant ( p < 0.05) difference in the P app B‐A to P app A‐B ratio for the straight‐chain but not the branched‐chain isoform, suggesting that the conformational change in structure altered the transport of this paraben (since their molecular weights are the same and LogP values are similar: ~ 3). FIGURE 3 Comparison of the P app A‐B (white bars), P app B‐A (black bars) and P app PAMPA (gray bars) permeabilities of straight‐chain with corresponding branched‐chain parabens. P app A‐B , and P app B‐A values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment. Values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. Values of P app A‐B , which were statistically significantly higher than P app B‐A ( p < 0.05) are denoted with an asterisk. The P app values for the three different branched‐chain forms of butylparaben were similar in terms of their magnitude and the tendency to exhibit vectoral A‐B permeability, although the latter was only statistically significant for isobutyl‐ and sec ‐butylparaben (Figure 3 ). Changing the methyl group to a phenyl group did not alter the P app A‐B or P app B‐A values, despite increasing the LogP from 1.87 to 3.21. Addition of a benzyl group also increased the LogP (to 3.56) but in this case, the P app A‐B value was decreased. The addition of the large branched‐chain alkyl group (to 2‐ethylhexylparaben) resulted in a low permeability of this paraben, which also exhibited a higher LogP of 5.36. As observed with straight‐chain parabens, P app B‐A tended to be lower than P app A‐B values, with statistically significant lower values ( p < 0.05) for all except isopropyl‐ and tert ‐butylparaben.


## Straight‐Chain Parabens
3.1.1 Straight‐Chain Parabens The P app A‐B and P app B‐A values were calculated using the amount of parent paraben only in the receiver compartment or using the total amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed during the incubation (shown in Table S2 , along with values for reference compounds incubated at the same time). Compounds with a P app A‐B of 10 × 10 −6 cm/s were considered to be highly permeable (the reference for this was testosterone); whereas low permeability compounds were classified as those with P app A‐B values of < 1 × 10 −6 cm/s (the reference for this was atenolol). The P app B‐A:A‐B ratio was 31.5 for the reference control, erythromycin, which confirmed the presence of MDR1‐mediated efflux in the Caco‐2 monolayers used in these incubations. P app A‐B values using the measurement of parent paraben only indicated that all straight‐chain parabens exhibited low permeability compared to testosterone (Supplementary Table S2 ). However, when the amount of 4‐HBA formed and present in the receiver compartment was included in the calculation of P app A‐B, five of the straight‐chain parabens were reclassified as highly permeable. Since these values better reflected known in vivo permeability (Shin et al. 2019 ) and have been recommended as a better indication of P app for the parabens (Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2007 ), all further comparisons were made using P app A‐B values calculated using a total of parent paraben plus 4‐HBA formed and present in the receiver compartment. Figure 2 shows the correlation between the LogP and P app values in Caco‐2 cells (P app A‐B and P app B‐A ) and in the PAMPA (P app PAMPA ) for all straight‐chain parabens. P app A‐B values for parabens with chain lengths of C1 to C5 were higher (2.9‐ to 3.7‐fold—see Supplementary Table S2 ) than that of testosterone (10.92 ± 2.49 × 10 −6 cm/s). The P app A‐B decreased with increasing chain length and hence LogP; whereby, parabens with a chain length of longer than C4 (LogP > 3.6) were classified as moderate to low permeability. The P app B‐A values also decreased with increasing LogP; however, P app B‐A values for several parabens (C1–C5) were statistically significantly lower than their corresponding P app A‐B values ( p < 0.05), suggesting preferential vectoral permeability in the A‐B direction. This was also true for 4‐HBA (for which the LogP is 1.56); although the difference did not reach statistical significance (P app A‐B was 5.90 ± 3.12 × 10 −6 cm/s and P app B‐A was 1.70 ± 0.27 × 10 −6 cm/s). The permeability measured in the PAMPA (P app PAMPA ) were similar to the P app B‐A values for all straight‐chain parabens. FIGURE 2 Correlation of P app A‐B (open circles) and P app B‐A (black circles) permeability in Caco‐2 cells and PAMPA permeability (gray circles) of straight‐chain parabens with their LogP. P app values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment and are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. LogP values were from the EPA Dashboard and are listed in Supplementary Table S1 . Values of P app A‐B , which were statistically significantly higher than P app B‐A ( p < 0.05) are denoted with an asterisk.


## Branched‐Chain Parabens
3.1.2 Branched‐Chain Parabens The permeability of propylparaben was different from its branched chain isoform, isopropylparaben (Figure 3 ). There was a statistically significant ( p < 0.05) difference in the P app B‐A to P app A‐B ratio for the straight‐chain but not the branched‐chain isoform, suggesting that the conformational change in structure altered the transport of this paraben (since their molecular weights are the same and LogP values are similar: ~ 3). FIGURE 3 Comparison of the P app A‐B (white bars), P app B‐A (black bars) and P app PAMPA (gray bars) permeabilities of straight‐chain with corresponding branched‐chain parabens. P app A‐B , and P app B‐A values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment. Values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. Values of P app A‐B , which were statistically significantly higher than P app B‐A ( p < 0.05) are denoted with an asterisk. The P app values for the three different branched‐chain forms of butylparaben were similar in terms of their magnitude and the tendency to exhibit vectoral A‐B permeability, although the latter was only statistically significant for isobutyl‐ and sec ‐butylparaben (Figure 3 ). Changing the methyl group to a phenyl group did not alter the P app A‐B or P app B‐A values, despite increasing the LogP from 1.87 to 3.21. Addition of a benzyl group also increased the LogP (to 3.56) but in this case, the P app A‐B value was decreased. The addition of the large branched‐chain alkyl group (to 2‐ethylhexylparaben) resulted in a low permeability of this paraben, which also exhibited a higher LogP of 5.36. As observed with straight‐chain parabens, P app B‐A tended to be lower than P app A‐B values, with statistically significant lower values ( p < 0.05) for all except isopropyl‐ and tert ‐butylparaben.


## Factors Affecting Mass Balance (MB)
3.2 Factors Affecting Mass Balance (MB) Figure 4A shows the MB (i.e., the % of the starting amount recovered from the apical and basolateral compartments) of parent paraben at the end of the 1 h incubation with Caco‐2 cells. The MB for all parent parabens was notably lower in A‐B than in B‐A incubations. For example, for the C1–C5 straight‐chain parabens, the MB values ranged between 27% and 35% in A‐B incubations, while they were 81% to 89% in B‐A incubations. With the exception of 2‐ethylhexylparaben, the MB in A‐B incubations with branched‐chain parabens varied between 24% and 74%, while their MB in B‐A incubations were all above 81% (range 81% to 97%). FIGURE 4 Mass balance of parabens in A‐B incubations (white bars) and B‐A incubations (black bars) in the Caco‐2 assay (a) incubations with Caco‐2 cells and (b) empty Transwells. Mass balance was according to quantification of parent chemical only in the apical and basolateral compartments. In the same incubations, the total amount of 4‐HBA recovered from the apical and basolateral compartment plus the lysate (c) and amount of parent detected in the cell lysates (d) are shown. All values are expressed as a percentage of the applied dose and are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. All parabens tested were chemically stable under the conditions of the assay without cells (data not shown). The cause of the loss of MB was investigated by measuring (a) non‐specific binding (NSB) to empty Transwells (Figure 4B ), (b) ester hydrolysis of the paraben to 4‐HBA (Figure 4C ) and (c) accumulation of parent in cells (Figure 4D ). There was minimal NSB to the Transwells of the straight‐chain parabens with chain lengths of C1–C4 in both A‐B and B‐A incubations (the MB ranged between 89% and 101%). By contrast, longer straight‐chain parabens from C5 to C9 bound the Transwells, with increasing NSB as the chain length increased (Figure 4B ). This accounted for the majority of the loss of recovery observed in the Caco‐2 cell incubations for these parabens. Notably, the longest straight‐chain paraben, dodecylparaben, exhibited only a small degree of NSB (MB was 85% and 89% in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively), which was also reflected in the MB of this paraben in incubations with Caco‐2 cells (MB was 81% and 87% in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively (Figure 4A )). Of the branched‐chain parabens, only phenylparaben and 2‐ethylhexylparaben exhibited extensive NSB to the Transwells. The extent of binding of phenylparaben was higher in the A‐B than in the B‐A incubations (MB was 38% and 71% in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively); whereas NSB of 2‐ethylhexylparaben was extensive in both directions (the MB was 13% and 25% for A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively). The MB reported in Figure 4A is a measure of the amount of parent chemical recovered; however, some of this was metabolized by the Caco‐2 cells to 4‐HBA. Figure 4C shows the % of the initial amount of paraben which was hydrolyzed to 4‐HBA and detected in the apical and basolateral compartments, plus the lysate (which was assumed to reflect the intracellular amount). The hydrolysis to 4‐HBA in A‐B incubations accounted for up to 60% of the loss of the MB of the straight‐chain parabens. Likewise, the loss of MB for phenylparaben in cell incubations could also be attributed to metabolism, since 57% (A‐B) and 11% (B‐A) of this paraben was hydrolyzed during the 1 h incubation. The MB shown in Figure 4A reflects the amount recovered in the apical and basolateral compartments but does not take into account the amount accumulated in the cells. The distribution of the parent parabens in the cell lysates and apical and basolateral compartments after apical or basolateral application of the parent paraben is shown in Figure S1 . While less than 5% of the initial amount of C1‐C5 straight‐chain parabens accumulated in the cells (Figure 4C ), up to 32% of the initial concentration of C7–C12 straight‐chain parabens accumulated, the extent of which was higher in B‐A than A‐B incubations (26%–32% in A‐B incubations and 4%–7% in B‐A incubations). Several of the branched‐chain parabens also accumulated to some extent in the cells, most notably 2‐ethylhexylparaben (17% and 46% of the starting concentration was detected in the lysate in A‐B and B‐A incubations, respectively).


## Metabolism to 4‐HBA and Distribution Across Compartments
3.3 Metabolism to 4‐HBA and Distribution Across Compartments Comparisons of the LogP with the % of parent straight‐chain paraben hydrolyzed to 4‐HBA, detected in the lysate and apical and basolateral compartments, in A‐B and B‐A incubations are shown in Figure 5A . For all parabens, there was more 4‐HBA formed in A‐B than B‐A incubations. Moreover, for A‐B incubations, there was an inverse relationship between the % hydrolyzed and the LogP of the straight‐chain parabens, ranging between 1.87 and 7.4. The highest extent of hydrolysis was observed for methylparaben (67% hydrolyzed) and the lowest extent was observed for dodecylparaben (0.8% hydrolyzed). By contrast, there was no link between the LogP and the % hydrolyzed when the same parabens were incubated in the B‐A direction (Figure 4A ). The LogP values of the branch‐chain parabens were also not linked to the % hydrolyzed in either direction (data not shown), although the LogP only ranged between 2.9 and 5.4. FIGURE 5 Comparison of the (a) LogP with the % hydrolysis of straight‐chain parabens in A‐B (open circles) and B‐A (black circles) incubations and (b) permeability calculated as the P app A‐B minus P app PAMPA with the % hydrolysis of straight‐chain parabens (open circles) and branched‐chain (open triangles) in A‐B incubations. P app values were calculated according to the amount of parent plus the amount of 4‐HBA formed, which was present in the receiver compartment. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. Interestingly, there was a good correlation between the extent of hydrolysis and the P app A‐B for straight‐chain parabens ( R 2 = 0.93). This correlation was increased ( R 2 = 0.98) when the values for passive diffusion (P app PAMPA ) were subtracted from the P app A‐B value (Figure 5B ). Of the branched‐chain parabens, only phenylparaben fitted into the same correlation (Figure 5B ). The extent of hydroxylation of the remaining five parabens was lower than would be predicted based on their permeability. Figure 6 shows the distribution of 4‐HBA in the cell lysates and apical and basolateral compartments after apical or basolateral application of the parent paraben. In general, once formed from the hydrolysis of the parent chemical, up to 22% of 4‐HBA remained in the cells. For most parabens, the direction of movement of 4‐HBA appeared to be preferentially from the apical to basolateral compartment, since the amount detected in the basolateral side was higher than that detected in the apical compartment. The exceptions to this were the longer straight‐chain parabens (> C4) and tert ‐butylparaben. After apical application of pentylparaben, 4‐HBA formed from its hydrolysis was evenly distributed in the apical and basolateral compartment. Relatively more 4‐HBA formed from heptyl‐ to nonylparaben appeared in the apical compartment and, in the case of dodecylparaben and tert ‐butylparaben, 4‐HBA was not detected in the basolateral compartment at all. After basolateral application of sec ‐butylparaben, 4‐HBA was also only detected in the lysate and apical compartments. FIGURE 6 Distribution of 4‐HBA in (a) A‐B and (b) B‐A Caco‐2 incubations with straight‐chain and branched‐chain parabens. The amount of 4‐HBA in the apical compartment (white bars), lysate (black bars) and basolateral compartment (gray bars) is expressed as a mean (+SD of n = 3 wells) of the total amount recovered.


## Investigations Into Transporter‐Mediated Uptake and/or Efflux
3.4 Investigations Into Transporter‐Mediated Uptake and/or Efflux 3.4.1 Papp and Uptake of p ‐Coumaric Acid The presence of the MCT1 transporter on the apical membrane of the Caco‐2 cells used in these experiments was confirmed using p ‐coumaric acid. Firstly, the permeability of this MCT1 substrate across Caco‐2 cells in Transwells with an apical pH of 6.5 (and basolateral pH of 7.4) was 2.7‐fold higher in the A‐B than the B‐A direction (Figure 7A ). This vectoral permeability was abolished by incubating the Caco‐2 cells with buffer at pH 7.4 in the apical and basolateral compartments, whereby permeability was by passive diffusion. Secondly, the uptake of p ‐coumaric acid into monolayers of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates (thus exposing only the apical membrane to chemical) increased with an increase in the proton gradient, i.e., when the pH of the apical compartment was decreased from pH 7.4 to pH 5.5 (Figure 7B ). Based on these findings, we classified a good MCT substrate to have (a) a P app A‐B to P app B‐A ratio greater than 2.0 (poor substrates have similar P app A‐B and P app B‐A values, i.e., a ratio of 1) and (b) increased uptake into the apical membrane of Caco‐2 cells with decreasing apical pH. An MCT1 inhibitor was not used in these studies since the concentrations shown to be effective in Caco‐2 cells (Kimura, Haraguchi, et al. 2014 ; Konishi et al. 2003 ) were in the millimolar range and thus were considered to have non‐specific effects. FIGURE 7 (a) Comparison of the P app A‐B and P app B‐A permeability of p ‐coumaric acid with the apical compartment set at pH 6.5 and 7.4 and (b) time‐ and pH‐dependent uptake of p ‐coumaric acid into monolayers of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates. Incubations were in buffer maintained at pH 7.4 (open circles), pH 6.5 (black triangles), pH 6.0 (black squares) and pH 5.5 (black circles). P app values were calculated according to the amount of p ‐coumaric acid in the receiver compartment. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. 3.4.2 P app and Uptake of Propylparaben and Isopropylparaben When propylparaben was evaluated according to the criteria above, it was not classified as a substrate for MCT1. The vectoral permeability (measured using parent chemical and 4‐HBA in the receiver compartment) was not abolished by changing the apical pH from 6.5 to 7.4 (Figure 8a ) and the uptake of parent chemical into cell monolayers (assessed by comparing the remaining parent in the medium) was not impacted by pH (Figure 8b ). While there was no effect of pH on the uptake of parent propylparaben, the concentration of 4‐HBA in the medium (which had been produced in the monolayers) increased with increasing apical pH from 6.5 to 7.4 (Figure 8c ), suggesting that this was a substrate for MCT1 (Figure 8d ). FIGURE 8 (a) P app A‐B (white or gray bars) and P app B‐A (black or gray hatched bars) permeability of propylparaben and isopropylparaben in Caco‐2 incubations with the apical compartment set at pH 6.5 and 7.4. Concentration of (b) propylparaben and (c) 4‐HBA over time in the medium of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates and maintained at pH 7.4 (open circles), pH 6.5 (black triangles), pH 6.0 (black squares) and pH 5.5 (black circles). All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. (d) Scheme showing proposed pathway: Passive uptake of propylparaben is pH‐independent but the formation of 4‐HBA decreases the intracellular pH and results in its increased efflux via the MCT1 transporter. In contrast to propylparaben, the permeability of isopropylparaben was the same in both directions and at both pHs (Figure 8a ) and the parent chemical was the major contributor to the overall permeability of this paraben. Unlike propylparaben, the efflux of 4‐HBA into the medium above the cells was unaffected by changes in pH (data not shown). 3.4.3 Contribution of Passive and Active Permeability The contribution of passive and active permeability of parent chemical and 4‐HBA in incubations with propylparaben and isopropylparaben was evaluated by measuring the amount of each in the receiver compartment of Transwells with two different apical pHs (Figure 9 ). The overall permeability of 5 μM propylparaben was indicated to be mainly driven by vectoral permeability of 4‐HBA, since the rate of transport of the parent chemical itself in the receiver compartments was the same in both A‐B and B‐A directions while the rate of transport of 4‐HBA formed was much higher and vectoral, i.e., preferentially in the A‐B direction (Figure 9a ). The rate of transport of the parent propylparaben to the receiver compartment was also not impacted by pH, although the rate of transport of 4‐HBA formed was moderately increased in the A‐B direction (from 832 ± 157 pmoles to 1343 ± 67 pmoles by 60 min) when the apical compartment was at 7.4 (Figure 9b ). The overall permeability of isopropylparaben was indicated to be mainly driven by passive diffusion of parent paraben itself since (a) the rate of transport of the parent was higher than 4‐HBA and (b) neither the parent chemical nor 4‐HBA amounts in the receiver compartments were impacted by pH or the A‐B or B‐A direction (Figure 9c,d ). FIGURE 9 Kinetics of the transport across Caco‐2 cells of parent propylparaben (black triangles) and 4‐HBA formed during the incubation (open circles) in A‐B (solid lines) and B‐A (dotted lines) incubations with different apical compartment pHs. The test chemicals, propylparaben (a and b) and isopropylparaben (c and d), together with 4‐HBA formed were measured in the receiver compartment of Transwells with the apical pH set at 6.5 (a and c) and 7.4 (b and d). Initial concentrations of test chemicals (parent parabens) were 5 μM. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. The relative contribution of active efflux of 4‐HBA formed from the hydrolysis of the parent chemical to the overall A‐B permeability of propylparaben decreased with increasing concentrations from 1 μM to 100 μM (Figure S2a ). The contribution of 4‐HBA was higher than the parent chemical at 1, 5, and 25 μM but lower at 100 μM, whereas the contribution of 4‐HBA and the parent were comparable at 50 μM. Therefore, the permeability in the A‐B direction was mainly attributable to the parent chemical at a high concentration of 100 μM but minor at low concentrations (1–25 μM). This relative contribution correlated with the P appA‐B :P appB‐A ratios, which were above two at concentrations of 1–25 μM but were lower at 50 μM (the ratio was 1.4 at both pHs tested) (Figure S2b ). At 100 μM the permeability was driven mainly by diffusion of the parent chemical, which was reflected in the P appA‐B :P appB‐A ratio (which was 1 at both pHs tested). The hydrolysis to 4‐HBA started to be saturated at concentrations greater than 25 μM in the A‐B direction and greater than 50 μM in the B‐A direction (Figure S2c ), which likely decreased the contribution of this transporter‐mediated pathway at higher concentrations.


## Papp and Uptake of p‐Coumaric Acid
3.4.1 Papp and Uptake of p ‐Coumaric Acid The presence of the MCT1 transporter on the apical membrane of the Caco‐2 cells used in these experiments was confirmed using p ‐coumaric acid. Firstly, the permeability of this MCT1 substrate across Caco‐2 cells in Transwells with an apical pH of 6.5 (and basolateral pH of 7.4) was 2.7‐fold higher in the A‐B than the B‐A direction (Figure 7A ). This vectoral permeability was abolished by incubating the Caco‐2 cells with buffer at pH 7.4 in the apical and basolateral compartments, whereby permeability was by passive diffusion. Secondly, the uptake of p ‐coumaric acid into monolayers of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates (thus exposing only the apical membrane to chemical) increased with an increase in the proton gradient, i.e., when the pH of the apical compartment was decreased from pH 7.4 to pH 5.5 (Figure 7B ). Based on these findings, we classified a good MCT substrate to have (a) a P app A‐B to P app B‐A ratio greater than 2.0 (poor substrates have similar P app A‐B and P app B‐A values, i.e., a ratio of 1) and (b) increased uptake into the apical membrane of Caco‐2 cells with decreasing apical pH. An MCT1 inhibitor was not used in these studies since the concentrations shown to be effective in Caco‐2 cells (Kimura, Haraguchi, et al. 2014 ; Konishi et al. 2003 ) were in the millimolar range and thus were considered to have non‐specific effects. FIGURE 7 (a) Comparison of the P app A‐B and P app B‐A permeability of p ‐coumaric acid with the apical compartment set at pH 6.5 and 7.4 and (b) time‐ and pH‐dependent uptake of p ‐coumaric acid into monolayers of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates. Incubations were in buffer maintained at pH 7.4 (open circles), pH 6.5 (black triangles), pH 6.0 (black squares) and pH 5.5 (black circles). P app values were calculated according to the amount of p ‐coumaric acid in the receiver compartment. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells.


## Papp and Uptake of Propylparaben and Isopropylparaben
3.4.2 P app and Uptake of Propylparaben and Isopropylparaben When propylparaben was evaluated according to the criteria above, it was not classified as a substrate for MCT1. The vectoral permeability (measured using parent chemical and 4‐HBA in the receiver compartment) was not abolished by changing the apical pH from 6.5 to 7.4 (Figure 8a ) and the uptake of parent chemical into cell monolayers (assessed by comparing the remaining parent in the medium) was not impacted by pH (Figure 8b ). While there was no effect of pH on the uptake of parent propylparaben, the concentration of 4‐HBA in the medium (which had been produced in the monolayers) increased with increasing apical pH from 6.5 to 7.4 (Figure 8c ), suggesting that this was a substrate for MCT1 (Figure 8d ). FIGURE 8 (a) P app A‐B (white or gray bars) and P app B‐A (black or gray hatched bars) permeability of propylparaben and isopropylparaben in Caco‐2 incubations with the apical compartment set at pH 6.5 and 7.4. Concentration of (b) propylparaben and (c) 4‐HBA over time in the medium of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard 24‐well plates and maintained at pH 7.4 (open circles), pH 6.5 (black triangles), pH 6.0 (black squares) and pH 5.5 (black circles). All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. (d) Scheme showing proposed pathway: Passive uptake of propylparaben is pH‐independent but the formation of 4‐HBA decreases the intracellular pH and results in its increased efflux via the MCT1 transporter. In contrast to propylparaben, the permeability of isopropylparaben was the same in both directions and at both pHs (Figure 8a ) and the parent chemical was the major contributor to the overall permeability of this paraben. Unlike propylparaben, the efflux of 4‐HBA into the medium above the cells was unaffected by changes in pH (data not shown).


## Contribution of Passive and Active Permeability
3.4.3 Contribution of Passive and Active Permeability The contribution of passive and active permeability of parent chemical and 4‐HBA in incubations with propylparaben and isopropylparaben was evaluated by measuring the amount of each in the receiver compartment of Transwells with two different apical pHs (Figure 9 ). The overall permeability of 5 μM propylparaben was indicated to be mainly driven by vectoral permeability of 4‐HBA, since the rate of transport of the parent chemical itself in the receiver compartments was the same in both A‐B and B‐A directions while the rate of transport of 4‐HBA formed was much higher and vectoral, i.e., preferentially in the A‐B direction (Figure 9a ). The rate of transport of the parent propylparaben to the receiver compartment was also not impacted by pH, although the rate of transport of 4‐HBA formed was moderately increased in the A‐B direction (from 832 ± 157 pmoles to 1343 ± 67 pmoles by 60 min) when the apical compartment was at 7.4 (Figure 9b ). The overall permeability of isopropylparaben was indicated to be mainly driven by passive diffusion of parent paraben itself since (a) the rate of transport of the parent was higher than 4‐HBA and (b) neither the parent chemical nor 4‐HBA amounts in the receiver compartments were impacted by pH or the A‐B or B‐A direction (Figure 9c,d ). FIGURE 9 Kinetics of the transport across Caco‐2 cells of parent propylparaben (black triangles) and 4‐HBA formed during the incubation (open circles) in A‐B (solid lines) and B‐A (dotted lines) incubations with different apical compartment pHs. The test chemicals, propylparaben (a and b) and isopropylparaben (c and d), together with 4‐HBA formed were measured in the receiver compartment of Transwells with the apical pH set at 6.5 (a and c) and 7.4 (b and d). Initial concentrations of test chemicals (parent parabens) were 5 μM. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. The relative contribution of active efflux of 4‐HBA formed from the hydrolysis of the parent chemical to the overall A‐B permeability of propylparaben decreased with increasing concentrations from 1 μM to 100 μM (Figure S2a ). The contribution of 4‐HBA was higher than the parent chemical at 1, 5, and 25 μM but lower at 100 μM, whereas the contribution of 4‐HBA and the parent were comparable at 50 μM. Therefore, the permeability in the A‐B direction was mainly attributable to the parent chemical at a high concentration of 100 μM but minor at low concentrations (1–25 μM). This relative contribution correlated with the P appA‐B :P appB‐A ratios, which were above two at concentrations of 1–25 μM but were lower at 50 μM (the ratio was 1.4 at both pHs tested) (Figure S2b ). At 100 μM the permeability was driven mainly by diffusion of the parent chemical, which was reflected in the P appA‐B :P appB‐A ratio (which was 1 at both pHs tested). The hydrolysis to 4‐HBA started to be saturated at concentrations greater than 25 μM in the A‐B direction and greater than 50 μM in the B‐A direction (Figure S2c ), which likely decreased the contribution of this transporter‐mediated pathway at higher concentrations.


## Discussion
4 Discussion We have made a detailed investigation of the permeability of a panel of straight‐chain and branched‐chain parabens using Caco‐2 cells. For the purpose of the presentation of the results, we have used LogP as the main physicochemical parameter in correlations with Papp values. It is acknowledged that this is not the only parameter, which is correlated to membrane permeability (Lanevskij and Didziapetris 2019 ); however, LogP is reported to be correlated with the hydrolysis of parabens in liver and skin S9 (Lester et al. 2021 ) and to non‐specific binding to plastic (Li et al. 2023 ), both of which were important in the interpretation of the data generated. The P app A‐B decreased with increasing chain length and hence LogP; whereby, parabens with a chain length of longer than C5 (LogP > 3.6) were classified as moderate to low permeability. This correlates with the findings of others who observed a decrease in paraben permeability in the secretory direction of Caco‐2 cells as the LogP increased (Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2007 ). The P app B‐A values for straight‐chain parabens also decreased with increasing LogP and were of a similar magnitude to that measured in the PAMPA. This indicates that the P app B‐A reflected passive diffusion. Considering the high LogP of some of the parabens, it was anticipated that some of them would adsorb to the plastic Transwells. This was indeed the case, whereby the MB of straight‐chain parabens started to decrease with LogP values of four (pentylparaben). Interestingly, the longest straight‐chain paraben, dodecylparaben, exhibited only a small degree of NSB. The reason for this was unlikely to be poor solubility, which was also shown to be complete in this study and those of Lester et al. ( 2021 ) who used the same concentration of 5 μM. Dodecylparaben is a solid and is thus unlikely to have formed a floating liquid layer on top of the buffer. Further investigations into this outlier were not pursued since it was shown to achieve a good MB. The inclusion of bovine serum albumin (BSA) up to 4% in the apical and/or the basolateral buffer has been recommended for lipophilic compounds with a low MB (Cai et al. 2019 ; Krishna et al. 2001 ; Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2008 ; Liu et al. 2010 ; Saha and Kou 2002 ). This is thought to improve the sink conditions and/or reduce NSB to plastic wells. The presence of BSA is reported to improve the permeability of lipophilic compounds without affecting the P app of less lipophilic or reference compounds, e.g., mannitol (low permeability) and propranolol (high permeability) ((Krishna et al. 2001 ; Lakeram, Lockley, et al. 2008 ). However, the concentration and location of BSA should be carefully considered for parabens, since these exhibit high plasma protein binding, and P app values for certain highly protein‐bound compounds, e.g., naproxen and warfarin, have been shown to be decreased when 2% BSA is added to both compartments in Caco‐2 studies (Perloff et al. 2011 ). NSB may not be the only phenomenon causing a decrease in the recovery of parent compound from the apical and basolateral compartments. In these experiments, failure to detect 100% of the parent compound in the apical and/or basolateral compartments was also due to some accumulation in the cells and/or hydrolysis to 4‐HBA. The latter effect is important when interpreting the overall permeability of the parabens (or indeed other esters) since P app values based on the detection of only the parent compound can lead to the underestimation of the predicted oral bioavailability. For example, methylparaben and propylparaben are considered to be rapidly and extensively absorbed after oral administration (SCCS 2013 ; SCCS 2021 ; SCCS 2023 ; Shin et al. 2019 ), suggesting high intestinal permeability; however, the P app A‐B using parent only suggested this would have low intestinal permeability. When the P app A‐B was calculated to include the amount of 4‐HBA in the basolateral compartment, it was classified as having a high permeability. There was a direct correlation between the % paraben hydrolyzed and P app A‐B —the higher the hydrolysis of straight‐chain paraben, the higher the A‐B permeability. The expression of human CES isoforms is organ‐specific, with CES1 predominantly expressed in the liver and CES2 in the intestine (Fagerberg et al. 2014 ; Ross et al. 2012 ). However, Caco‐2 cells are reported to exhibit a high expression of CES1 but negligible CES2 expression or activity (Imai et al. 2005 ). This observation was also evident in our experiments, in which the extent of hydrolysis of the straight‐chain parabens was inversely proportional to their LogP and chain length, suggesting that the carboxylesterases present in the Caco‐2 cells preferentially metabolized shorter alcohol groups. This substrate preference is similar to that of the liver CES1 isoform, which also prefers esters with a small alcohol group, e.g., methyl‐, ethyl‐, and propylparaben (Laizure et al. 2013 ; Taketani et al. 2007 ). In addition, the extent of hydrolysis of most parabens in Caco‐2 cells correlated directly ( R 2 = 0.90) with their reported rate of hydrolysis in liver S9 (but not skin S9) fractions (Lester et al. 2021 ) (Figure S3 ). The exceptions to the correlation were phenyl‐, benzyl‐, and 2‐ethylhexylparaben, which were more extensively metabolized by liver S9 than by Caco‐2 cells, possibly due to them being good substrates for both CES1 and CES2, both of which are present in liver S9 (Ross et al. 2012 ). There have been some concerns that standard Caco‐2 cells used in this assay are not suitable for esters due to these cells expressing CES1 and not CES2 (Ishizaki et al. 2018 ), especially if the products of hydrolysis exhibit an altered permeability compared to the parent compound, as was the case for 4‐HBA. However, when the permeability calculation includes both the parent and ester metabolite, then the in vitro values still reflect in vivo intestinal absorption, at least for methylparaben and propylparaben, which are both reported to be rapidly and completely absorbed via the oral route (SCCS 2013 ; SCCS 2021 ; SCCS 2023 ). While Caco‐2 cells are still suitable for providing information on intestinal permeability (e.g., whether a chemical exhibits high, medium or low permeability), they should not be used to reflect intestinal metabolism. Test systems, such as intestinal microsomes or S9 containing the CES2 form should be used to perform extrapolations to human intestinal metabolism (Fujino et al. 2014 ). In accordance with the results of Lakeram, Lockley, et al. ( 2007 ), the permeability of the C1–C5 straight‐chain parabens (when calculated using parent and 4‐HBA formed) was higher in the A‐B than the B‐A direction. Additionally, the B‐A permeability was similar to the permeability in the PAMPA, indicating that this direction of permeability is due to diffusion. These findings suggest that there was an impact of transporters predominantly on the absorptive A‐B direction for these parabens. Lakeram, Lockley, et al. ( 2007 ) attributed the vectoral transport of the parabens to their intracellular hydrolysis to 4‐HBA and subsequent removal from the cell by active efflux into the basolateral compartment. The mechanism they proposed implied that there is no MCT1 on the apical membrane; however, our results (and others (Kimura, Tsukagoshi, et al. 2008 ; Konishi et al. 2003 )) using the prototypical MCT1 substrate, p ‐coumaric acid, indicated the MCT1 transporter is also present on the apical membrane of Caco‐2 cells cultured in standard culture plates. In the same standard monolayer cultures, the transport of parent propylparaben itself was shown to be passive and pH‐independent. By contrast, once formed, 4‐HBA was actively transported out of the cells into the medium, which was pH‐dependent, thus indicating the involvement of proton‐dependent apical membrane MCT1 transporters. The kinetics of the transport of 4‐HBA, propylparaben, and isopropylparaben across Caco‐2 cells in Transwells suggest that although MCT1 is present on the apical membrane, the efflux of 4‐HBA is predominantly via the basolateral membrane, which accounts for the vectoral permeability in the A‐B direction when incubated in Transwells. In the studies by Lakeram et al., the P app A‐B for 4‐HBA was equivalent to its P appB‐A ; however, in the current study, 4‐HBA permeability was predominantly in the secretory A‐B direction, which supports the involvement of this metabolite in the overall P app A‐B , at least for the shorter straight‐chain parabens. The MCT1 transporter may play a role in maintaining the intracellular pH, whereby sustained increased concentrations of acids (such as 4‐HBA) are counteracted by removing them via active efflux due to the proton gradient produced by their accumulation (MCT1 transports 4‐HBA from the acid cell environment into the neutral basolateral compartment). While the magnitude of P app A‐B is correlated with the rate of hydrolysis to 4‐HBA and the extent of 4‐HBA efflux via MCT1 for the straight‐chain parabens tested, this was not the case for five of the six branched‐chain parabens (benzyl‐, sec ‐butyl‐, isobutyl‐, tert ‐butyl‐, and isopropylparaben). The exception to this was phenylparaben, which is a very good substrate for CES1 and CES2. There was less extensive hydrolysis of the five branched‐chain parabens, indicating they are poorer substrates of the carboxylesterases present in the Caco‐2 cells than their straight‐chain forms (1% –21% hydrolysis compared to ~ 50% for their equivalent straight‐chain forms) (Table 1 ); however, their P app A‐B values were still ≥ 10 × 10 −6 cm/s, suggesting a good cellular uptake. These permeabilities were also higher than their permeability in the PAMPA ((P app PAMPA values were all ~ 5 × 10 −6 cm/s). When P app PAMPA values are subtracted from the P app A‐B and P app B‐A values, the contribution of transporters can be evaluated (right‐hand columns of Table 1 ). This separated the parabens into four different groups (visualized in Figure 10 ). The first are parabens that diffuse readily into the cells (based on PAMPA) and are extensively hydrolyzed to 4‐HBA—this means that the overall permeability of the chemicals is increased due to additional A‐B efflux via MCT1 efflux of 4‐HBA. The second group are those with low passive diffusion of the parent in both directions and moderate to low hydrolysis to 4‐HBA. Thus, for these parabens, there is also a low amount of 4‐HBA present in the cells; therefore, there is low or no additional MCT1‐mediated transport of 4‐HBA, regardless of the extent of hydrolysis since the intracellular concentrations of the parent are low. The third and fourth groups are the branched‐chain parabens that readily diffuse into the cells and are not extensively hydrolyzed to 4‐HBA but still exhibit high permeability in the A‐B and/or B‐A directions when the passive permeability values (P app PAMPA ) are subtracted. This means that transporter‐mediated permeability occurs, but there is low or no additional MCT1‐mediated transport of 4‐HBA accounting for the overall permeability of these parabens. Parameters of the parent chemicals other than LogP and the extent of hydrolysis linked to permeability across membranes include the fraction of unionized drug at a specified pH (calculated from the pKa), the total H‐bond count (acceptor and donor), polar surface area, and MW (Wolk et al. 2019 ). However, these parameters were all within the ranges of properties exhibited by parabens in the first two groups (see Table S1 ) and therefore cannot account for the vectoral permeability across these parabens. This suggests that processes other than passive diffusion or active transport by MCT1 are involved in the vectoral transport of the parent parabens. This will need further experimental investigations to be able to elucidate the transport pathway(s) involved. TABLE 1 Grouping of the permeability of parabens using information from the Caco‐2 and PAMPA assays. The contribution of transporters was calculated by subtracting the P app PAMPA values from the P app A‐B and P app B‐A values. P app values are a mean ± SD, n = 3. DO = diffusion only (the resulting value is negative but is set to 0), NDP = no directional permeability. Paraben % Hydrolyzed in A‐B direction PAMPA (× 10 −6 cm/s) Papp (× 10 −6 cm/s) Parent + 4‐HBA Diffusion permeability subtracted: P app —P app PAMPA (× 10 −6 cm/s) A‐B B‐A A‐B:B‐A ratio A‐B B‐A A‐B:B‐A ratio Additional MCT1 efflux of 4‐HBA—mainly in A‐B direction Methyl 66.9 ± 1.9 6.05 ± 0.97 36.92 ± 6.77 6.96 ± 0.13 5.3 30.87 0.91 33.9 Ethyl 64.6 ± 6.5 4.72 ± 0.84 35.13 ± 12.20 7.61 ± 0.48 4.6 30.41 2.89 10.5 Propyl 53.8 ± 2.4 7.04 ± 1.22 25.89 ± 5.65 5.84 ± 0.16 4.4 18.85 0 (DO) > 18 Butyl 52.1 ± 5.6 5.68 ± 1.9 22.78 ± 7.35 4.63 ± 0.09 4.9 17.1 0 (DO) > 10 Pentyl 35.8 ± 2.0 4.28 ± 3.71 9.92 ± 2.16 4.81 ± 0.43 2.1 5.64 0.53 10.6 Phenyl 70 ± 0.7 5.35 ± 2.58 30.82 ± 2.57 4.81 ± 0.43 6.4 25.47 0 (DO) > 25 Low passive diffusion of parent—low or no additional transporter mediated transport Heptyl 26.2 ± 0.7 1.9 ± 1.26 3.14 ± 0.44 2.67 ± 0.22 1.2 1.24 0.77 1.6 Octyl 42.3 ± 2.3 0.73 ± 0.51 1.15 ± 0.33 1.64 ± 0.22 0.7 0.42 0.91 0.5 Nonyl 20.7 ± 3.7 3.06 ± 3.67 1.74 ± 0.72 0.70 ± 0.05 2.5 0 (DO) 0 (DO) 1 (NDP) Dodecyl 0.8 ± 0.2 0 ± 0 0.0011 ± 0.0007 0.0003 ± 0.0001 3.7 0.0011 0.0003 3.7 2‐Ethylhexyl 8.9 ± 1.5 1.49 ± 1.55 2.59 ± 0.52 0.53 ± 0.06 4.9 1.1 0 (DO) 1 Contribution of transporter‐mediated PARENT efflux mainly in A‐B direction (low MCT1 mediated transport) Benzyl 20.9 ± 2.6 3.79 ± 1.99 9.84 ± 1.48 4.54 ± 0.75 2.2 6.05 0.75 8.1 sec ‐Butyl 5.2 ± 0.4 5.64 ± 0.89 13.61 ± 0.6 7.8 ± 0.88 1.7 7.97 2.16 3.7 Isobutyl 17.1 ± 2.8 5.15 ± 1.58 15.21 ± 0.92 6.42 ± 0.12 2.4 10.06 1.27 7.9 Contribution of transporter‐mediated PARENT efflux—similar in both directions (no MCT1 mediated transport) tert ‐Butyl 1.1 ± 0.1 4.04 ± 1.94 15.08 ± 3.62 12.84 ± 0.36 1.2 11.04 8.8 1.3 Isopropyl 10.4 ± 1.9 5.64 ± 0.58 18.20 ± 3.08 18.51 ± 0.95 1.0 12.56 12.87 1.0 FIGURE 10 Visualization of the grouping of the permeability of parabens using information from the Caco‐2 and PAMPA assays. See Table 1 for values. Future work could investigate the presence of transporters in the clone of Caco‐2 cells used in these experiments, which could help to reveal whether they may contribute to the transport of parent parabens and/or 4‐HBA across apical and basolateral membranes. A limitation of the current study is that the contribution of transporters was not confirmed by using prototypical inhibitors. However, in the case of MCT1, the concentrations of inhibitors suggested by others are in the millimolar range (Kimura, Haraguchi, et al. 2014 ) and may therefore not be specific to one transporter. While the use of suggested inhibitors may add weight to the conclusions regarding the involvement of this transporter, it may not be definitive evidence for MCT1. The impact of CES1 mediated hydroxylation of parabens on their permeability across Caco‐2 cells could be investigated using a CES inhibitor, similar to the studies of Lakeram, Lockley, et al. ( 2007 ). They used bis‐(p‐nitrophenyl) phosphate (BNPP) which resulted in the P app A‐B and P app B‐A being equivalent for all tested parabens, indicating passive diffusion of the parent chemical. They also showed that the correlation between permeability and lipophilicity remained in the presence of the esterase inhibitor.


## Conclusions
5 Conclusions This study demonstrated that the P app A‐B of straight‐chain parabens decreased with increasing chain length and hence LogP, whereby parabens with a chain length longer than C5 (LogP > 3.6) were classified as moderate to low permeability. The P app B‐A values for straight‐chain parabens also decreased with increasing LogP and were of a similar magnitude to that measured in the PAMPA. This indicates that the P app B‐A reflected passive diffusion. A loss in mass balance was due to a combination of non‐specific binding, accumulation in the cells, and/or hydrolysis to 4‐HBA. The extent of hydrolysis of the straight‐chain parabens was inversely proportional to their LogP and directly proportional to their CL int, in vitro in liver S9, suggesting that they are substrates for carboxylesterase‐1 (CES1). When the permeability was calculated using parent chemical and 4‐HBA, the in vitro values (at least for methyl and propylparaben) were more reflective of their reported rapid and extensive in vivo absorption. The permeability of the C1‐C5 straight‐chain parabens was higher in the A‐B than in the B‐A direction, indicating vectoral permeability. The extent of vectoral permeability is correlated to the extent of hydrolysis to 4‐HBA and the concentration‐dependent effect on the contribution of passive vs. active efflux of parent and 4‐HBA, respectively. The transport of parent propylparaben itself was passive and pH‐independent. By contrast, 4‐HBA formed from the hydrolysis of propylparaben was actively transported out of the cells into the medium, which was pH‐dependent. This indicates the involvement of proton‐dependent apical membrane MCT1 transporters, the presence of which on the apical membrane was confirmed using the prototypical MCT1 substrate, p ‐coumaric acid. Despite the presence of MCT1 on the apical membrane, the kinetics of the transport of 4‐HBA, propylparaben, and isopropylparaben across Caco‐2 cells in Transwells suggested that the efflux of 4‐HBA is predominantly via the basolateral membrane. The correlation between the extent of paraben hydrolysis and the P app A‐B values did not extend to the branched‐chain parabens (except for phenylparaben, which is a very good substrate for CES1 and CES2). When the permeability due to passive diffusion (P app PAMPA) was subtracted from the P app A‐B values of five branched‐chain parabens, the resulting values were still ≥ 10 × 10 −6 cm/s despite them being poorer CES1 substrates than their straight‐chain forms. This suggests that the A‐B permeability of these parabens was not linked to 4‐HBA formation and its MCT1‐mediated efflux. Further studies are needed to investigate this further.


## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


## Supporting information
Figure S1: Distribution of 4‐HBA (a and b) and parent paraben (c and d) in A‐B (a and c) and B‐A (b and d) Caco‐2 incubations with straight‐chain and branched‐chain parabens. The amount of 4‐HBA or parent paraben in the apical compartment (white bars), lysate (black bars) and basolateral compartment (gray bars) is expressed as a mean (+SD of n = 3 wells) of the total amount recovered. Figure S2: Concentration, time and pH dependent measurements of propylparaben (a) transport kinetics, (b) P app A‐B and P app B‐A permeability and (c) 4‐HBA transported across Caco‐2 cells to the receiver compartment in incubations in Transwells. Initial concentrations were 1, 5, 25, 50 and 100 μM. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. Values in (a) are 4‐HBA (open circles) and parent propylparaben (black triangles) amounts transported in the A‐B (solid lines) and B‐A (dotted lines) direction at an apical pH of 6.5 or 7.4. In (b), values for P app A‐B using apical pH 6.5 (black bars), P app B‐A using apical pH 6.5 (white bars), P app A‐B using apical pH 7.4 (grey bars), and P app B‐A using apical pH 7.4 (grey hashed bars). In (c), the amounts of 4‐HBA transported in the A‐B direction at pH 6.5 (open circles, solid lines), B‐A direction at pH 7.4 (black circles, dotted lines), A‐B direction at pH 7.4 (open triangles, solid lines), B‐A direction at pH 7.4 (black triangles, dotted lines) are shown. Figure S3: Comparison of the % hydrolysis of straight‐chain and branched‐chain parabens incubated in the A‐B direction with their in vitro intrinsic clearance (CL int, in vitro ) in (a and b) human liver S9 fractions and in (c and d) EpiSkin S9 fractions. Figures (b) and (d) show values without the outliers denoted in (a) and (c), respectively. All values are a mean ± SD of n = 3 wells. Values for CL int, in vitro are from Lester et al. ( 2021 ). Table S1: Physiocochemical properties of the 16 parabens tested. Values are from the EPA CompTox Dashboard ( https://comptox.epa.gov/dashboard/ ). Experimental values were taken where possible, otherwise predicted values were used. Table S2: Permeability of parabens using the Caco‐2 assay. LogP values were from the EPA CompTox Dashboard, using either experimental (exp) values from the “experimental data” tab or experimental (exp) or predicted (pred) values from the EpiSuite table (CS‐Epi). *The mass balance for the reference compounds is the amount of parent compound recovered from the apical and basolateral compartments only and the mass balance for the parabens and 4‐HBA is the amount of parent compound and 4‐HBA recovered from the apical and basolateral compartments, as well as the cell lysates.
